It should be self-evident that video games are a natural medium for activism. They free players from the patriarchal and infantilizing structure of the artist/audience hierarchy, giving the players active roles in forming the video game narratives. No longer are players passive recipients of the vision and knowledge of the artist since when were artists supposed to be listened to anyway?

Instead, video game artists can train players to acknowledge their own agency in a way that carries over from the virtual to the real world.
Measured against this activist standard, Every Day the Same Dream is an evil application of the medium. Depicted in the video game world is a poetic facsimile of the upper-middle class nuclear family, proceeding along the tedious course of a white-collar white man s life, and it is built in such a way that denies players any agency to change their subjected status.

Characters do not even have the ability to futilely resist. The most empowered actions the characters perform are  don t put on clothes  and  touch a cow.  This video game s message is clear: you cannot escape. The artists have consciously depicted their target player audience; who else but those who sympathize would spend their time on such a tedious video game? It seems an ironic gesture that the real world white-collar players are so controlled and subdued that they would never dream of rebellion within this virtual white-collar world. Even the most radical actions they can consider will lead them nowhere. Their only option is suicide, which many of their colleagues have already chosen. Every Day the Same Dream fails to pose any critical commentary on contemporary life. The video game introduces nothing to its players with which they do not already agree. It is a reckless perpetuation of the imagined mythic chains that bind them, pandering to purportedly disenfranchised players.

As if reinforcing the enslavement of its players was not enough, the video game also creates an internal hierarchy of its component media to keep established forces in control of the revolutionary. Video games can be seen as a gestalt comprised of elements of many other media: visuals, sound, plot, and interaction are some of the elements that contribute to the game as a whole. However, the interactive component of Every Day the Same Dream exists only as a means of displaying the non-interactive parts. When playing, the only reason the player continues is to watch the vignettes that serve as aglets for the shoestring paths of the video game. Controlling the character provides minimal interest for players.

This hierarchical infrastructure of media is by no means unique to this video game. It seems a common idea among certain types of video game artists and thinkers that, if passive art has such an established history, then games can only be art if they embrace this traditional mode of viewership. This tradition stems, in part, from the notion that art relies on the exact and genius vision of one artist who controls precisely what the viewers are supposed to see. If video games allow the players to make choices, the artist has given up this control. Not only is this an outdated definition of art   there are plenty examples of generative, participatory, systemic, and other art forms that require the artist to relinquish some degree of control over the finished product   it is also a completely inaccurate definition of video games.

Photo by anonymous, courtesy Tale of Tales None
Video game designers have absolute control over every action the player can perform within the bounds of the game, and any action the player takes that puts them beyond the realm of the game causes the player to cease playing the same game.

These passive video games are not solely coming from those working within the machinery of the mainstream culture industry. The most egregious offenders come from those who supposedly represent the avant-garde in video game design: self-professed conceptual artists like Tale of Tales and Jordan Magnuson, who have thought long and hard about the medium, separated themselves from external pressures, and all but declared that yes, it s clear, the future of video games as art is to do away with the player s agency. We re dreadfully sorry, but it just has to go   how else can video games be art? No other form of art lets you do things. It s for the best.

Using video games in this way demeans the potential of play and perpetuates the reign of passive art. Although it s fast becoming a truism, it bears repeating: there is a seemingly infinite amount of squandered potential in video games. Everyone seems to acknowledge this, but almost no one is doing anything to approach that potential, either because they are paralyzed by financial necessities, enjoy creating meaningless paracosms that satisfy mainstream tastes, or are stuck in the past, making video games that prostrate themselves in front of their non-interactive artistic predecessors.

In this work of art, a living natural system takes on the form of a manufactured pattern. Tobacco leaves are die-cut into a bilaterally symmetrical botanical abstraction and incubated in tiling square petri dishes that contain the nutrients necessary to promote new leaf growth. The premise for this work is the merging of a living botanical system with the cultural legacy of botanical motifs. By attempting to structure a living organism inside an abstraction of itself, a poetic fractal of consciousness, control, and plasticity unfolds in time. The essence or idealized structure of a living system collides with its material existence. While the bilaterally symmetrical pattern, which is die-cut along the mid-vein of freshly grown tobacco leaves, might be considered similar to an Arabesque pattern, the pattern is derived as an abstraction based on the geometrical essence[43] of a singular leaf, and its phyllotaxy is seen as an arrangement from aerial perspective.

Allison Kudla, Growth Pattern, 2010. Photo Credit: Kristof Vrancken / Z33.

Image courtesy of artist. None
Plant cells are totipotent. This means that, depending on the ratio of auxins to cytokinins, the cells have the capacity to differentiate into any organ in the plant. The concept of  totipotency,  or total potentiality, is precisely the kind of biological concept and extensible idea to ignite a visual artist s creative imagination. Plants are already excellent morphological carriers for epigenetic and phenotypic modulation, and then to also discover the potential for complete organ plasticity is astonishing. Essentially every cell in a plant has the instructions or algorithms embedded inside of it to replicate into any organ its DNA understands how to produce. Human tissues are much more specialized, and only stem cells contain such total potentiality, but imagining how this plasticity could manifest in a plant through human intervention was a driving force in the creation of this work of art. The project merges an instantiation of our cultural legacy of botanical abstractions with the very material those abstractions modeled themselves after. Given that the material is alive and open to biochemical influences, the pattern morphs as the plant responds to what is essentially a process of disorganization and reorganization for the botanical system. Tobacco was chosen primarily because of the affordances it gave in the tissue culturing process. It has a high-degree of sensitivity and plasticity, lending itself to tissue culture, and its leaves are broad and flat, making it easy to cut shapes from its leaves.

Since each initially nearly identical unit in the whole that composes the work of art functions as a self- contained ecosystem or micro-environment, several precautions were taken to make sure that, when the

leaves were placed into their petri dish environments, they were thoroughly decontaminated and sterilized. However, as with any experiment, it is possible for contamination to occur. In some, the tissue dies; in others, parasites take over and grow faster than the new leaves. In some micro-environments, aseptic conditions are achieved and new sprouts begin to grow from the die-cut leaf tissue s disembodied cells. Although I considered choosing to grow roots from leaves or leaves from roots, I chose to extend the growth of leaves from leaves. This decision was made to further pronounce the concept of disorganization

Allison Kudla, Growth Pattern, 2010. Enlargement showing condensation pattern. Photo Credit: Kristof Vrancken / Z33.

and reorganization of the biological medium and also to investigate the collision of the abstraction of reality to reality itself. Therefore, the cultured leaves are provided with the hormones that cause the cells of the leaf cuttings to produce new leaf tissue. The newly growing leaves are extending and remixing the form of the botanical motif. Due to the repetition of the pattern, the occupants to the space witness a performative experiment of morphological and ecological changes in each micro-environment over the duration of the exhibit. Much like in contrapuntal composition, each petri dish is created identically, yet due to the variables present in the process and also in the leaves themselves, deviance from the initiating structure occurs in the eventuality of the work of art over time. To continue the comparison to musical structure, the cultural form it borrows, a singular square that generates a repeating pattern, is akin to common time or a 4/4 structure in music. The installation begins in an incredibly harmonious fashion, yet this  4/4  structure is modulated, and disrupted by the varying behaviors, growths, and senescence processes occurring in each unit. The algorithms running on the cells themselves, as they strive to reorganize themselves, can be seen alongside the algorithms of contamination as parasites grow quickly, covering the plant tissue and taking the plant s nutrients. The structure for the work can no longer be defined with any precision. The harmony of the work of art begins to disorganize at the very moment that the individual micro-environments are starting their own processes of expression and reorganization. The structure of the work begins controlled by the human and ends controlled by an almost expected biological variability and unpredictability. It is not known, even to the artist at the time the work is instigated, which micro-environment will successfully grow new leaf tissue and survive the human disorganization and manipulation of its tissue so as to contribute to a harmonious macro-environment and which micro-environment will decay, grow parasites, and contribute to a dramatic and dynamic display of entropy and ruin. Finally, if all micro-environments were to produce new leaf tissue, the whole would still appear to have disrupted the harmonious structure. As I will discuss in the next chapter, theoretical biology does not know precisely why leaf tissue grows in the position it does on the leaf and

ascribes the potential for growth from a cell to a random order. Thus, even when sterilization balance achieves perfection, the pattern of sprouting is not always ordered within that order, or  hyper-ordered.  The pattern emerging within the pattern still contains an element of the unpredictable and when it does match, then that is precisely where the work is seen to create an emergent pattern.

The life-cycle of the work goes through three macro-scale state changes: an initial state, a growth state, and a decay state. The growth state is composed of various micro-states that can be generalized to contain in some leaf tissue growth, and in others bacterial and fungal growth. The decay state is always eventually arrived at by all of the units which comprise the whole, however, in some this happens in a matter of days and in others in a matter of months. The timeline for new leaf growth is approximately three to four weeks, whereas the timeline for bacterial and fungal growth can range from two to three days to two to three weeks. It takes a period of two to three months before all of the petri dishes have arrived at a state of decay. The project is highly temporal in nature; it doesn t leave behind any material of lasting permanence beyond the frames that hold the micro-environments. The work of art exists in time and space as a collection of ever-changing and continuous moments which the viewer samples with each visit to the installation. Therefore, the work is structured to stage multiple viewings over durations of days, weeks, and months so as to witness both micro and macro, implicit and explicit expressions of patterns and changes of state. As described prior, in the first stage of the work, the viewer encounters 64 nearly identical square units in an 8 x 8 array that hold leaf tissue that has been methodically cut into a precise and bilaterally symmetrical pattern. Over a period of days, condensation develops, and, over a period of weeks, bacteria, fungi, and new leaves may grow, and, finally, over a period of two to three months, the tissue decays and dies as nutrient supplies deplete with each unit in the system changing, becoming, and ending in a different way. This process of unpredictability and differentiation is beautifully discussed by the philosopher Gilbert Simondon in his ideas of individuation.[63] Although the piece begins as a collective whole united in form and pattern, by the end of the exhibition, each micro-environment has stepped through its own expression of haecceity. The final state which identifies each petri dish is unknowable and literally infinite in its explicit variability, yet its essential individuation is limited to a finite number of implicit possibilities. The delicate process of sterilization leaves much guesswork as contamination and also cell death are invisible processes at first and take days and weeks to develop into our operational awareness.

Growth Pattern leverages the algorithms embedded in plant cells and their surrounding micro-organisms to render a self-generating, time-based and physically real visual process. There is a difference between this and previous works in the field of Artificial Life (AL): Rather than the back-end for the botanical animation being a computer program written in a human-designed coding language, the back-end is the biology of the organism itself; the front-end is the cultural legacy of botanical patterns found in tiling designs. The software that generates this work, rather than running on a computer operating system, is running on the biochemical structure of plant cells, and I am working and composing with them. The living organism is the operating system for the work. This particular code comes from the totipotency of all plant cells, meaning any cell in a plant can become any organ in a plant. This thereby generates a living animation where petri dishes, or micro-environments, act as a microcosmic universe or whole, and the algorithm and software for the work is housed in the biochemistry and DNA of a living system, which is also where the live-process of my artwork occurs.

The basic formula for organ generation from cultured cells involves the use of two specific chemical growth regulators. They are called  auxins  and  cytokinins.  Plants generate these naturally, however, scientists in the mid-twentieth century discovered how to synthesize these chemicals in laboratories. The primary use for these synthetic hormones or  plant growth regulators  is research around the mechanisms of the cell and, in a more applied way, in micropropagation, cloning, and tissue culture. The algorithm is

as follows: a greater ratio of auxins to cytokinins = roots, a great ratio of cytokinins to auxins = leaves, and equal ratios of auxins and cytokinins = undifferentiated tissue. I took this basic formula to generate a living image or process-based real-time cellular animation where leaves, cut in the abstraction of themselves, generate new leaves. Therefore, my chemical formula was cytokinins > auxins = leaves. I added nutrients, sugar, antibiotics, and antimycotics to the growth medium. The growth medium was made of a standard laboratory grade agar. The sterilization technique of the tissue involved a procedure of one minute in ethanol, five minutes in a mixture of sterile water, bleach, Dettol and Tween (detergents), and a final swirl in ethanol. The tissue was then rinsed in two baths of sterile water before being cultured into the petri dishes. The placement of the tissue is done inside of a sterile hood.

Allison Kudla, Growth Pattern, 2010. Tissue that has sprouted new leaves. Photo Credit: Kristof Vrancken / Z33.

The project went through many iterations before its final outcome, and that involved changes of method, process, pattern, size, and shape. The first proof of concept for this work was done at a smaller scale of only 16 petri dishes, a 4 x 4 array, sized at 3.5  per square. The leaf tissue was laser cut into a pattern that echoed the damask wallpaper that hung near where it was being exhibited. The process of laser cutting the leaf tissue was refined so that the edges of the leaf were not burned. However, the act of putting a leaf into the top corner of a rectangular CNC table and pressing  go  while a laser cut through the leaf took a large degree of control out of the process. The cutouts were ill fitting to the form of the leaf and often included the middle vein of the leaf in the shapes being cut. The middle vein of the leaf contains the most bacteria, the least meristem tissue, and it is very difficult to sterilize. After switching to using a pattern based on bilateral symmetry, using the middle vein of the leaf as a guide, and cutting the pattern s pieces out by hand with dies rather than with a machine, the concept and the method started to reinforce each other to a much higher degree. I was able to compose the symmetry and use of the tissue in a much more meaningful way for the design. I was also returning to the process of cutting that biologists traditionally use; the die technique being much more similar to using a cork borer. The form for the work resonated with the material and process for the work in a much more consistent way. Furthermore, ideologically, the pattern of damask wallpaper was much less about the geometric essence and formation of a plant than the design of the bilaterally symmetrical pattern that was used in the final outcome of the work. I came at this bilaterally symmetrical pattern because I was researching examples of botanical abstractions that were more focused on the universal essence of a plant and how it is structured than on its figurative depiction. In the process of reading about ornamental patterns, I determined that the most

Allison Kudla, Growth Pattern, 2010. Left: Leaves after being cut with bilaterally symmetrical dies. Right: Die sets.

interesting way to create the pattern for Growth Pattern would be to design one bilaterally symmetrical unit that could be rotated four times to generate a central botanical pattern. Each unit then becomes a representation of a leaf, and the leaf then rotates about an invisible central axis as the pattern radiates out into clusters of four. The pattern was influenced by existing Arabesque designs, but its final format was a completely original pattern that was broken up into twenty-four individual pieces or dies that are mirror images of each other, or twelve pairs of dies. The smaller sub-shapes generated within the larger pattern reference shapes as diverse as the human figure, a rocking horse, a Dutch shoe, and the way human skin cells look when viewed under a microscope. As a whole, the tile appears as a botanical abstraction of a leaf and as all tiles come together, it references a field of plants from aerial perspective. The work is presented on the floor rather than the wall, further emphasizing the concept of the tableau we are gazing down at being an abstraction of an agricultural system.

Fig. 2. Documentation of leaf tissue curling in the smaller scaled petri dishes

The units which make up the whole were tested in two different scales. First, in approximately 3.5  square petri dishes and then in approximately 9  square petri dishes. It was discovered that the tissue, when cut into pieces small enough for the 3.5  square, too quickly curled and morphed, losing all recognition of the originating pattern [Fig. 2]. This is one reason for the 9  square dishes, however, the larger scale of the work also added to a sense of the sublime and infinite when displayed over a 2.5 meter by 2.5 meter area, consisting of 64 petri dishes in an 8 x 8 array. It required the viewers to walk around it, the work existing at the liminal edges of being able to be taken in as a whole from a human-scaled height and position. The large petri dishes are also such an uncommon object, that it reinforced the forms ambiguity, which is an essential characteristic in the process of conveying to the viewer a sense of the experiential and surreal. It could not be minimized as another example of art in petri dishes, for the form

transcended such a reading. The trademark tools and tropes of science laboratories were subverted enough so that the visual resonance of the aesthetics of the modern, the industrial, the unit, and the manufactured could become just as equally pronounced. The sensitivity to the materials and their visual presentation placed emphasis on the effects of scientific tools and processes not being aesthetically lost but rather seamlessly blended into the aesthetics of the industrial and technological paradigm shifts of our

Allison Kudla, Growth Pattern, 2010. Working in the sterile hood at the NCBS in Bangalore, India.

time. The support systems for the living systems were intentionally square, solid, manufactured, and uniform; this visual counterbalance to the fragile, living, and changing micro-environments is essential to the aesthetic, emotional, and intellectual experience of the work. The brightly glowing light-box stage that holds the square petri dishes emphasizes an analogy to a pixel-based screen and adds one more contextual reference to computational art; the generative display of screen-based AL is re-imagined in living, growing matter. Additionally, the ventilated light-box serves to draw out all of the essential visual characteristics of each living micro-environment while also providing the tissue with the right temperature and light energy levels to keep the cells alive and optimized for potential growth.

I researched and developed this work at the University of Washington in the biology lab of Dr. Liz Van Volkenburgh. Since that time, I refined my protocol by consulting and working with scientists from the University of Salzburg, the University of Hasselt, and the University of Oviedo. Practical work was performed at the latter two in addition to the University of Washington, Seattle. Although proof of concept was achieved at the University of Washington, I continued my exploration of culturing die-cut leaf tissue while at the National Center for Biological Sciences (NCBS) in Bangalore, India. I was working there as an artist-in-residence with an appointment at the Srishti School of Art, Design and Technology. Due to equipment access limitations, the work migrated from using a laser cutter to using dies. Fittingly, the process and design of the pattern became much more controlled and the pattern more geometrically elegant once the use of dies was introduced into the work. The process of creating this work is described in more detail in subsequent chapters, however, it involves custom-made dies, tobacco plants, petri dishes, and growth medium that contains agar, sugar, nutrients, hormones, antibiotics, and antimycotics. The production is carried out in a biology lab with a sterile hood and autoclave and requires a greenhouse for growing the tobacco plants which supply the work of art its leaf tissue. The tobacco plants grown for the

work are an academic variety known as Xanthi. I originally received the strain from Douglas Ewing, the director of the University of Washington s Greenhouse, and I have been harvesting and saving these seeds since then. When the work was presented in Hasselt, a camera with intervolumeter was mounted directly above the work and set to record one photograph every 15 minutes over the duration of a two-month span. Documentation of the beginning and end state of this time-lapse video can be seen below. [Fig. 3]

Fig. 3. Growth Pattern, 2010. Still from Time-lapse documentation. Beginning and End.

Allison Kudla, Growth Pattern, 2010. Photo Credit: Kristof Vrancken / Z33.

Botanical Abstraction

The drawings of patients with Parkinsonism, as they are  awakened  by L- Dopa, form an instructive analogy. Asked to draw a tree, the Parkinsonian tends to draw a small, meager thing, stunted, impoverished, a bare winter-tree with no foliage at all. As he  warms up ,  comes to , is animated by L-Dopa, so the tree acquires vigor, life, imagination and foliage. If he becomes too excited, high, on L-Dopa, the tree may acquire a fantastic ornateness and exuberance, exploding with a florescence of new branches and foliage with little arabesques, curlicues, and what-not, until finally its original form is completely lost beneath this enormous, this baroque, elaboration.([57] p 54-55)

-Oliver Sacks, The Man Who Mistook His Wife For A Hat

This quotation is an intriguing one in that it brings to question if the process whereby humans abstract nature into baroque configurations, curlicues, and arabesque patterns is somehow biologically linked somewhere in the physiology of our brains. This is particularly interesting when considering the cultural legacy of botanical motifs. Could it be that under certain chemically-induced somatic states plants appear to flourish in a way similar to what has been recorded in the evolution of ornamentation and botanical abstractions? Perhaps we use depictions and abstractions of plants in ornamental patterns precisely because they lend themselves so well to this format due to their inherent algorithmic properties of repetition and geometric configuration. Does the altering of certain chemicals in human physiology produce fantastical and elaborate hallucinations of ornamental patterns when gazing upon the foliage of a lush and full botanical form? If there is a connection in human physiology to the hallucination of plants into baroque, arabesque, and ornamental patterns, this research has not been done, however, it is an interesting idea to consider. If that hypothesis were true, what would happen if the plant was carved out into the form of the very abstraction the human mind perceives? How would the plant emerge within this human-ordered abstraction? How could the plant actively play a role in this fantasy? This was one of the thoughts that guided the creation of the work Growth Pattern.

Karl Blossfeldt, Forsythia suspensa, 1929. Photogravure.

While the process of creating botanical abstractions is ancient, centuries old, and appearing throughout many different cultures at many different times and in many different forms, there are a few hallmark motifs that arise over and over again. These most recognized and conventionalized botanical stylizations are rosettes, palmettes, calyxes, scrollwork, and fan- like flowers.[43] Karl Blossfeldt, a photographer from Germany who became most recognized in the early twentieth century for his published work Urformen der Kunst (Art Forms in Nature, 1929),[10] stands out as having begun, in a methodical way, the process of finding these idealized and stylized forms in actual nature. His photographs appear otherworldly, however, they are quite simply photographs of actual nature. He only manipulates the nature in so far as to cut, tie, nail, paste, and position or arrange these living artifacts in such a way as to most accurately translate the idealized form of a botanical abstraction. His working collages are truly amazing and relate directly back to the idea that perhaps idealized botanical forms were not invented by human beings but rather they were discovered when in a subjective and operational time and space that was unusual or somehow transcendent to the perceiver. Essentially, botanical abstractions are a form of

algorithmic perfection that do exist in our physical reality, however, it requires our minds to be able to see and order it in a particular way; it is only through a specific hyper-state of perception that these forms can or could be routinely observed.

While the preceding idea is not scientifically grounded, but rather guided by intuition, experience, and assumption, work has been done on how totipotent cells arrange and reorganize themselves into new organs. Chemical formulas are used to elicit certain responses from plant cells, but where these new organs place themselves in a leaf cutting is a mystery. If one were to cut a circle, or leaf disc, and place it into a micro-environment with the growth medium that contains the hormones for new leaf growth, and all conditions of sterility were properly achieved and the cells were able to differentiate into new shoots, what determines where those new shoots grow? Why do they grow at 1 o clock on one leaf disc and 8 o clock on another, for example. It is observed that the new shoots can only grow out of callus tissue. This means that first, the cut or severed tissue responds to the act of being vivisected by growing clumps of undifferentiated tissue at the open and dislocated edges. Almost in a healing process, the organism sends more cells to those edges and the cells develop a sort of scab or husk of undifferentiated callus tissue. Once the cut edge has this buffer, the chemical messages being sent from the micro-environment are taken into the cells and they respond by differentiating based on those hormonal signals. Out of the callus tissue, new shoots sprout. It was hypothesized that perhaps there is more action potential for new shoot development at the opening of a vein, however, this was not proven as it wasn t most often at the site of a vein were new leaves sprouted; in fact, quite the reverse was true. It appears that callus tissue forms first where there is not a vein, as the vein does not contain the desired meristem tissue; beyond that rule, the pattern appears to behave randomly. My understanding of the word  random  in highly ordered and evolved biological systems is that it is simply unknown to us, not that it is without meaning or function. The visually repeating and methodical system set up in Growth Pattern makes the comparison of placement of new sprouts easier to see simply by viewing. When I cut the forms out of the leaves, I always made  pairs  for each tile, the dividing line of symmetry for the leaf guiding the dividing line of symmetry in each petri dish s pattern. For this reason, it is very interesting to see fungal growths [Fig. 5] and even in some cases leaf sprouts [Fig. 4] happening in a mirrored form from one side of the square dish to the next. I have included images of some examples of this emergent pattern happening within the pattern below. Achieving an emergent pattern within a pattern or a hyper-ordered pattern was a goal of the work, as it further emphasizes the algorithmic and programmatic qualities embedded in living systems while simultaneously proving exactly how complex, diverse, and dynamic these systems can be.

Neuroscience, Memory and Art: a Discussion with Deborah Aschheim

Deborah Aschheim is an artist who creates work that investigates memory, memory loss, and place. I had the opportunity recently to talk to her about her work, her experience dealing with the medical community, and what she is working on now.

Currently, she has a five-year survey at San Diego State University, called  Feeling-of-knowing.  She has collaborated with Lisa Mezzacappa to create many of the sound sculptures that are on display. Aschheim

Image courtesy of Deborah Aschheim. None
likes to collaborate with musicians because she feels that the sound gives her sculptures a more  sensorial  or emotional feel. Her sculptures and installation encourage the viewer to interact with the sound and images that are being presented within the web-like structures. This hands-on aspect has to do with the body and grounding the memories in the physical world.

Aschheim studied anthropology during her undergrad, and has a history of Alzheimer s disease in her family, which has been much of the motivation for her work. While doing a residency at  Headlines Center for the Arts in Marin, she ran into an opportunity to investigate at the Memory and Aging Center at the University of California, San Francisco. Through this, she started going to the clinic on a regular basis, which eventually led to setting up a residency program at the center. During this time, she was able to meet with researchers and doctors there.

When I asked her what she thought about her experience at the memory center and whether she thought the medical community was open to having an artist around, she responded that it was a very important experience for her and that yes, for the most part, they were open to having her around. It appeared that because the center was located in San Francisco, a city known for arts and culture, and the fact that these were scientists interested in the brain, they were very open to arts and interested in what Aschheim was doing. During her time there, she was able to interview the researchers and even act as a sort of connection point between the researchers who were stationed throughout the city. As an artist, Aschheim was very well equipped for this role.

Aschheim met Indre Viskontas while at the center, a PhD student, who also happened to be an opera singer. This combination of art and science made her an ideal collaborator for Aschheim, and she will be participating at a panel discussion of Aschheim s work in San Diego, CA.

Currently, she is at a residency at the Orange County Great Park, which is a new park in Irvine, CA, that now occupies the old El Toro Air Force base. Richard Nixon would fly in and out the El Toro Air Force base on Air Force One while he was president, and he flew back to El Toro Air Force base after resigning the presidency. Aschheim still remembers Nixon s resignation, and it was a formative part of her childhood. In light of this, Aschheim interviews people about their memories of Richard Nixon as they go through the park, often hearing about the same  garbled, fragmented and distorted  memories of Nixon. In this new work Aschheim is starting to move beyond personal memory and into collective memory.

Not too long ago, the arts and the sciences were actually practiced side by side. Aschheim suggests that today the arts and the sciences can benefit each other, particularly when the artist is able to go into the realm of the elite scientist and perhaps bring the researchers back to reality.  They accomplish this by interacting with the scientist and reminding them that not everyone understands the complicated jargon they take for granted.  This therefore creates new and interesting dialogues around the science that can be funneled into the creation of the art.
Recently there has been a growing trend of do-it-yourself spaces popping up.  These spaces allow anyone who is just curious or crafty to create and build new things.  A recent space that focuses on  biohacking,  or experimenting with biology, has opened in the Silicon Valley.  I have recently checked out this new hackerspace, Biocurious.  Biohacking is gaining momentum and is now making its first appearance in the Silicon Valley; it is a movement being led by scientists, artists, and cultural critics who are attempting to create public awareness and access to biological information.  A biohacker is someone who is, essentially, doing biology as a hobby, not for a career.  It is very similar to the idea of someone who hacks computers as a hobby.  This all fits into the recent do-it-yourself (DIY) movement that has developed and is the main reason for the biohacking phenomena. The DIY movement includes people starting to grow their own food, make their own clothes, and backwards-engineer computers.

I discovered Biocurious as a meetup group.  This group is a little different than your run-of-the-mill social group.  The people developing the group have spent copious amounts of time and energy creating a  hackerspace  that is open for experimentation by the Biocurious community.  In September 2011, the group officially opened their doors and started their first community workshops.

Since I have a background in biology and create art that is concerned with science, I felt that it was necessary for me to attend these first workshops.  As one might expect, with a DIY culture, I found a group of highly motivated and curious people.  The founding members of Biocurious are passionate about what they do, and yet not all the members came from the biology field.

The first workshop I attended was about biospheres, which are self-contained ecosystems, and how to make them.  We did the simple process of making our own personal biospheres in jars and learned about the greater implications of biospheres, from the history of experimentation revolving around them, to their commercial aspects.

The second workshop involved lab work and how to properly culture glowing bacteria.  Now, anyone who is remotely familiar with science realizes that inserting genetic information from one species to a foreign species is the bread and butter of genetic engineering. The process was fairly simple, and anyone with high school lab knowledge would be able to do it.  Getting bacteria to glow requires inserting the green fluorescent protein, or GFP, from jellyfish into the bacteria.  Bacteria have a circular DNA, called a plasmid, which make it very easy to insert foreign DNA without disrupting the cell s primary functions, which are on the bacteria s main separate DNA strand.  My knowledge of pipettes slowly came back to me science is just like following a recipe.

If we look at early bioart, Eduardo Kac in 2000 created a  GFP Bunny,  named Alba that was a green fluorescent rabbit.  In another piece Genesis, Kac created a gene that was a translation of a sentence from the book of genesis and had it inserted into bacteria that was then cultured.

Many of these projects required collaborations between the artist and a scientist.  It is often difficult to find a scientist who is willing to help an artist navigate the laboratory to complete the sorts of projects Biocurious engenders.  However, with the combiniation of DIY bio and hackerspaces with people who do science for fun, hackerspaces like Biocurious make future artist and scientist collaborations possible.  If nothing else, these places allow artists to access equipment and a community that is interested in biology.

In the past, if you were an artist who was interested in science, you were fairly limited in what sort of work you could create. One could always draw about science, but if you really wanted to do anything with biology, you had to find a scientist with a lab who would hopefully be interested in having an artist around, and if nothing else, would at least tolerate the artist s presence. Your other option would be to be an artist as a hobby, and a scientist as your day job. Since the early 2000s, there have been artists who create bioart, or art that is working with  wet media  or  living tissues and organisms  as the media.

What might be the implications of bio hacking as an artistic practice? Up until recently, biology could only be practiced in well-funded institutions with expensive equipment. Citizen science and the do-it-yourself mentality are creating a movement so that anyone who is interested can gain access to lab equipment and play with science, without necessarily having a degree in biology. Therefore, this new way of practicing science may provide more opportunities for artists who are interested in science to gain access to the lab as a resource. A perfect example of this is a new group, BioCurious, located in the Silicon Valley that has recently opened and is providing an open source biology lab to the community. Here is the press release that further explains what BioCurious is about:

BioCurious, a hackerspace for biotech, is now open to the public! Amateurs, entrepreneurs, and professional scientists get access to the tools, classes, and community at our 2,400-square-foot lab in Sunnyvale, CA. You can create genetically engineered bacteria, sequence DNA, find the tools to get your bio-project growing, or make friends with amateurs and experts in the community.

BioCurious features a full wet lab, office space, and co-working area. Membership at BioCurious includes access to gel electrophoresis, real-time PCR, incubators, fridges, and freezers we also add new equipment regularly. Last year, 239 amazing people donated $35,319 on Kickstarter to catapult BioCurious out of the garage and into a full lab space. Over the past year, the BioCurious volunteers established a non-profit business entity, held meet-ups, acquired donated equipment, evaluated lab spaces, and established safety and waste disposal procedures. Why? We believe that innovations in biology should be accessible, affordable, and open to everyone. We ve built a community biology lab for amateurs, inventors, entrepreneurs, and anyone who wants to experiment with friends.

Education:

Beginners can become experts in their spare time. In one of our first classes, we made bacteria glow using DNA from jellyfish, the  hello world  experiment for synthetic biology. Hands-on classes in DNA sequencing, bioinformatics, hardware hacking, and more, are on the schedule. Our  Business of Biotech  lecture series is perfect for people trying to break into a new field. Classes for everyone from executives to pre-K young scientists are in the works. Membership is not required, and most classes are open to all ages.

Community:

Find co-discoverers, co-founders, and friends at BioCurious, whether you re looking for the creative spark of a novice or the technical expertise of a professional scientist. BioCurious is the first lab of its kind in the Bay Area, allowing anyone to participate in science. Our members come from backgrounds spanning economics, philosophy, and art, as well as science and engineering. Members can host meet-ups. Planned activities include science projects, art shows, and movie nights. We are collaborating to build something amazing. That s the spirit of BioCurious.

Innovation:

Have a great idea, but don t want to pursue it at work or school? We think experiments need a place to flourish. Builders and makers need a place to prototype. Good ideas need to become reality. BioCurious is a not-for-profit organization and does not make any claim to member intellectual property. We encourage start-ups and entrepreneurs to use our facilities and meeting rooms, and have special deals for dedicated bench space, equipment housing, and cold storage.

Change the World:

We ve come a long way over the last year. Our community now includes over 500 members in the Bay Area. At the Maker Faire we wowed thousands of visitors, and won an Education Award. We presented at the Synthetic Biology Conference. We piloted hands-on biotech classes for Singularity University. And now we re pleased to open the doors of our new lab in Sunnyvale. We re starting a new biotech revolution in the Valley come join us.

Playing Duchamp is a net art project and game developed by Scott Kildall, a new media artist whose work often translates between the virtual and the real. In this project, Kildall has programmed a chess computer to play chess as if it were Marcel Duchamp, thus birthing a virtual Duchamp in the form of an AI personality. The question of machine intelligence in game play has become especially relevant with the defeat of chess grandmaster Kasparaov by Deep Blue in 1997. More recently, we have seen IBM s Watson crush its human opponents in a televised 3-day Jeopardy contest. In his online artwork, Kildall combines new media with the legacy of conceptual art to create digitally coded personality for game play.

Image courtesy of Scott Kildall. None
Duchamp (1887-1968) was a French painter turned conceptual artist, film maker, chess player, mathematician, composer, and much more. In art circles, Duchamp is remembered for the desertion of retinal art in favor of the mind. This courageous break from established academic conventions in the arts opened the door for radically avant-garde adventures that wreaked havoc in 20th century art world. Duchamp s foray into the mind gave birth to readymades,  paving the way for artists such as Robert Rauschenberg, Jasper Johns, Andy Warhol, and Jeff Koons.

While turning the tables in the art world, Duchamp s other passion was the game of chess. He was a first-rate chess player and a member of several French teams, participating in Chess Olympiads during the late 1920s and early 1930s. He achieved the rank of Master and, with Vitaly Halberstadt, co-authored a treatise on endgame strategies in chess. By playing chess, Duchamp realized the beauty of the game and that a player s actions resided in the mind, like conceptual art.

Duchamp once commented that  I am still a victim of chess. It has all the beauty of art and much more. It cannot be commercialized. Chess is much purer than art in its social position.  Francis Naumann eloquently draws the analogy of Duchamp s art career to a game of chess in his co-authored book, Marcel Duchamp: The Art of Chess. Naumann even suggests that Etant donn s (the peephole artwork) is likened to the endgame of a chess match.

The connections between Duchamp and new technologies are often overlooked in his biography and discussions of his works. Duchamp was intoxicated by the new technological innovations of his day, such as the discovery of X-rays, electromagnetic energy flowing through bodies and the universe, the creation of the incandescent lamp, the hydraulic generator, the skyscraper, cinema, and the automobile. Some of these remarkable innovations found their way into Duchamp s popular works such as Nude Descending A Staircase and the Large Glass. He even produced a series of Rotoreliefs, which were optical disks placed on a vertically oriented turntable to produce illusions of motion in perspective.

Image courtesy of the artist. None
I recently spoke with Scott Kildall about how he developed Playing Duchamp; his process was a chess game in its own right. Kildall maneuvered different pieces of code: a Flash-based chess interface, custom CGI scripts, and a modified open source chess engine to assemble Playing Duchamp. Kildall also took time to include details such as 3D-rendered chess pieces based on Duchamp s original hand-carved set. Such work raises a few questions: What is a readymade in new media art? Who owns the invisible lines of the algorithm?

Playing Duchamp is a statement about Duchamp s place in the art world and the role chess plays in his art. For Duchamp, the game is played out in the mind and the beauty is found in the moves. Chess is likened to performance art combined with abstract thinking. The legendary 20th century artist would have been intrigued by the technology used to create Playing Duchamp and thrilled to reemerge as a specter hovering over chess games that he played over a career spanning 40 years. Kildall s Playing Duchamp makes Duchamp relevant in the Digital Age and gives him a place in cyberspace by virtual existence.

Other artworks inspired by chess such as Yoko Ono s White Chess Set and Gabriel Orozco s Horses Running Endlessly have recast chess as a metaphor for peace, rather than a game of conflict. Like these works, Playing Duchamp asks us to rethink this original war game by dismantling the usual mode of conflict; how can you feel like you  lost  the game when beaten by Marcel Duchamp himself?

Kildall s Playing Duchamp was unveiled at the 2010 exhibition titled  The Seduction of Duchamp: Bay Area Artists Respond,  which took place at the Los Gatos Museum of Art last fall. Duchamp s core interests such as science, technology, and chess converged at this exhibit and endowed Duchamp with a virtual presence on the internet, inspiring a debate about the virtues of new media art.

Duchamp remains the king of the art world with no contender in sight. By playing virtually, Kildall challenges us to rethink art s purpose, the place of new media, and video games within the context of Playing Duchamp and asks us to reevaluate our relationship to the late artist. Are all artists going to be checkmated by the legacy of Duchamp?

The digital code of Playing Duchamp protects the enigmatic artist s legacy. Marcel Duchamp would have been championing the merits of wireless communication, the world without boundaries, and the digital revolution. It is safe to speculate that he would have been pleased with Kildall s embrace of new technology and bringing him along to play the game. Though Duchamp passed half a century ago, he remains relevant and powerful. When the art market is driven by investments and speculations, we need to step back, look the possibilities in new media, and ask: What is art s endgame?
Emergent gaming trends increasingly connect virtual in-game space with  ordinary  or geophysical life space. Inclusion of real world interaction within game play is eminent. For example, the online virtual environment of Second Life has a working relationship that combines the in-world monetary system (the Linden) and real world currency. Additionally, Blizzard the game development company behind World of Warcraft (WoW) is currently investigating ways to synchronize WoW s auction house with real world currency.

Game worlds seem to be more inclined to partner with components in life space as opposed to the reverse. That being said, the unfortunate reality of gamification has started to take shape with both realms. Gamification, in this sense, is the use of trivial or monotonous game-emulated dynamics developed to reward individuals for participating in the consumption of goods and services.

There is, however, an alternative to this diluted perspective. Game designer and professor Ian Bogost notes that  serious games have given its advocates a way to frame the uses of games in governmental and industrial contexts, by making the claim that games can tackle consequential topics and provide profound results.  These can range from simple games, those employed to engage students in enjoyable learning processes, to more complex systems which may aim to critique various social constructs. For instance, the artist collective Third Faction works within existing game environments to educate and raise awareness by drawing parallels to real world experiences.

Recently, at ISEA 2011 in Istanbul, Third Faction presented  DPS  (Demand Player Sovereignty): a project promoting social activism and civil disobedience. In-game marches were held to protest the top-down governmental structure and the pornification of female avatars; this is one way artists have begun merging real world politics with the game space in a non-trivial way.

The future of gaming is morphing. However, until the majority of people begin to consider games as an alternate form of reality, the pendulum will remain unmoved. Avant-garde artists and educators are acting as a catalyst for this change. The result will be a merging of both the virtual and the geophysical world. Instead of integrating games into reality, as with gamification, reality will be integrated into games.

The Future of Gaming

 by John Bruneau

There is a lot of buzz right now over gamification, which is the process of infusing the monotony of  reality with gaming elements. We are already witnessing the incorporation of game mechanics and design techniques into all aspects of daily life. Businesses are jumping on the gamification bandwagon to push profits up, engage the consumer, and maintain popularity. There is a strong push in academia to gamify education and research. On the one hand, we have Serious Games and Games for Change, while on the other hand, we have foursquare America s Army and Badgeville all vying for our attention and trying to up the ante. Finally! We have the means to make learning fun, make buying fun, make taking surveys and giving away your personal information  fun. But all this is happening right now: Gamification is the present of gaming. So what about the future?

DevHub, a website website, increased the number of users who completed their online tasks from 10% to 80% after adding Gamification elements.

The future is full of intensity, excitement, and stress. Every aspect of life is so deeply infused with game mechanics that separating game and life is an impossibility. The constant need to grind, to level, to rack up points and experience points leads to unparalleled levels of anxiety. The necessity to continually keep up with the Joneses  achievements takes its toll on the human psyche. We need an exit. Desperately, people begin searching for a way to escape into a world of peace and mundane simplicity; a place where they wont be weighted, measured or scored, a place where quest-lines all come to an end. Banal is the new fantasy and games, as always, are there to rescue us from our reality.

 Games are the new normal    Al Gore

When life is a game, escapism becomes life   a simpler life, an ideal life. The kind of fantasy our parents reminisce about. We already see it happening in art, film, and television. Indeed, this future is not so distant. Several independent game titles currently indulge this sentiment. flOw, Flower, Passage, Desert Bus, MFAPrep Course, Dinner Date, Metro Rules of Conduct are all signs of things to come. As this new genre of games begins to rise in popularity, marketers and academics will begin looking for ways to introduce life-like elements into life. For better or worse, future schools, businesses and altruistic nonprofits will all try to lure us away from the leveling rat race with  Lifeification . Who could resist a website offering an embedded chance to unwind with a dying of old age simulator? The future of gaming is not the Gamification, but rather the Lifeification, of life.

 The lifeification of games is where we want to go in the game industry    Chris Hecker

The Future of Gaming

By Marek Kapolka

3rd faction. San Jose State University. None
If, as Duhamel said, video replaced our thoughts with moving images, then games will replace our thoughts with systems (dedicated gamers can attest to this ask them about their fever dreams). Whereas non-interactive media provide representations, games provide simulations. As such, the cognitive processes used to understand a game are completely different from those used to understand passive media. Even on a basic level, the player is required to learn a complex network of causes and effects in order to successfully navigate any game. This mode of thinking has the potential to create a framework for scientific curiosity. In science, as in game analysis, the observer asks a series of  why  questions down through layers of complexity in order to understand the systems that drive their subject. A game-savvy population would have an immense effect on culture. With the systemic fluency provided by playing games and a finely developed sense of agency (a requisite faculty of the gaming aesthete) players will not only have a lucid vision of the social order they want to live in, but will be able to design the rules of such a society.

The Future of Gaming

 by Thomas Asmuth

In Homo Ludens, the act of play was quoted as being  older than culture  itself by Dutch historian and theorist Johan Huizinga. In his argument, play transcends milestones by which we would frame  civilization  and  culture.  The impetus for play and gaming is an innate drive in mankind and other mammals; when framed in Huizinga s theory, the topic  Future of Games  sounds hyperbolic. The desire to play and game is instinctual stuff that we carry with us everyday: it resides deep within our psyche.

Contemporary popularization and interest in gaming (formally Ludology) is firmly rooted in the massive rise of personal computing and networking industries. The game industry regularly outsells Hollywood with yearly sales in hundreds of billions of U.S. dollars. These cyclopean revenues as well as the critical mass of a world-wide ludo-centric culture have inspired a creative generation comprised of software engineers, artists, and sociologists. These game culturalists are all focused on the nature of gaming and the possibilities it can create.

This emergent global gaming culture transcends geographic, social, and national boundaries: this is where the Future of Games attains traction. There is a very real sense of community within and around gaming systems. The citizens of the game inspire others and engage in research, criticism, debate, reflection, and derive pleasure from these things. Despite humanity s best attempts to segregate and become tribalistic around other kinds of local culture, the instinctual drive for gaming has the potential to subvert these identity issues. It may be one of the best ways humanity can collaborate and collectively bring forth models for discourse, change, and cultural improvement. The Future of Games is in the massively interconnected society which thrives within games and the evolving culture surrounding them.

Metadata and Digital Pedagogy: Surfacing Romantic-era Book Histories with Captions

(Excerpted from a presentation to be delivered at HASTAC V, U Michigan, Dec. 1-3, 2012, on a panel dedicated to investigating experimental ways to communicate 18th  and 19th-century book history metadata in TEI, pedagogy, and new textual digitization tools.)

Due to their proliferation at a time when experiments with book form and content exploded, and machine-produced books began to flood the market for the first time, romantic-era texts (roughly 1770-1840), in particular, require digital editors to clearly communicate their uniquely  bookish  book histories to contemporary readers and scholars. Late-18th- and early 19th-century books provide a perfect lesson in avoiding the pitfall of allowing one HTML copy of the text to stand in for the thousands of physical copies of this work that bespeak its abundant, heterogeneous circulation, and the way that readers used and left their traces in a sea of unique print editions.

To think about communicating book history metadata in new ways, I collaborated with James Ascher, Rare Book Cataloguer at CU-Boulder s Norlin Library, to curate an exhibit in Special Collections for my students to come and interact directly with early editions of British books and other objects, like maps. We also designed a caption-writing lesson that became the platform for students to create their own collaborative digital exhibit of the objects they worked with in Special Collections.

I decided to use captions as a way to communicate romantic-era book history because I theorize them as narrative and pedagogical expressions of bibliographical metadata the kind of data you would normally find in a teiHeader that describes an electronic text, its source, and its encoding methodology and history. While MARC records and conventional TEI metadata publish crucial information about a book s form and contents, they do a poor job of being interesting, and of teaching. The caption a miniature  essay  that fuses of the genres of the abstract, bibliographical description, and  thought captions  in comics theory is ideally rich in content delivered with humanism and pathos, rhetorical qualities that are essential for communicating lots of information in a small space, and in meaningful and exciting ways.

People sometimes ask me what I do.  I, ahhh .   Virtual Interventionist  doesn t fly in most circles around here. People don t take too kindly to  New Media  artist, either. Recently I settled on  performance artist . It s just easier.

It all began innocently enough. I used to be in theatre. Standing on a stage, surrounded by set and lights, becoming a character and creating an illusion   this was really my first experience with the notion of virtuality. As I incorporated more and more media into my theatre creations I was compelled to surround audiences in the work so they too could understand this experience of existing in a virtual space constructed sometimes out of nothing but light and intentions. My performances began to take the shape of installations   audiences having to enter an environment and be in it with me as I projected images on the walls and ceiling and incorporated the audience into the story. It was after one of these installation/performances at the 2002 Networks New Media Festival in my hometown of St. John s that I met visiting Vancouver artist Jeremy Owen Turner.

InWorld   a hybrid reality performance by Liz Solo. Image courtesy of artist. None
Jeremy presented a talk about new online virtual spaces   places on the internet where one could simulate a presence in a three dimensional space and via that presence, interact with others. I was intrigued. He encouraged me to meet him in a virtual platform called OnLive Traveler for a demonstration. When I finally got the program to download on my horrible little PC machine (because Traveller couldn t run on the mac) my big purple avatar head materialized on a flat plane. A box   Jeremy s avatar   floated towards me. We came face to face and the box spoke. It said:

 Are you there?

I was transported in that moment, and caught a glimpse of the yawning potential of this virtual space, where one could (re)incarnate one s human self in a synthetic environment and commune with others. It was strangely immersive, in a way everything I was looking for, at least theoretically speaking. A door opened and I fell in. The next ten years would be devoted to exploring the possibilities of performance within these online spaces   fortuitous considering what was to happen to live theatre over the next decade (i.e. Death). Still, in answer to the age old question  How do you get the elephant out of the theatre?  The answer remains    you can t   it s in her blood . Online virtual platforms became my stage.

OnLive Traveller s greatest feature was its real time voice interface. It gave you a sense of intimacy, a real feeling of telepresence. Traveler had almost no other interactive features. Unless you could learn to create in 3D Max or some other building program there was no way to effect the world except by performance and interaction with others. Jeremy and I went about creating the Virtual Wedding Project, seeking an avatar bride for Jeremy s avatar Count Onto von Distro. After much courting he was wed to the avatar Lady Lux Interior in a ceremony in Traveler that was simultaneously projected around an audience via RAVE technology at the Simon Fraser Institute in Surrey, B.C.. Possibly the first virtual wedding ever, the ceremony was overseen by my avatar (a high Priestess) and attended by a live audience and avatars from around North America.

InWorld screenshot. Image courtesy of the artist. None
The very first virtual event Jeremy and I performed together was in a text only RPG called Achaea. Jeremy and I met in the Land of Minia at the Crossroads by the NPC Vellis the Butterfly Collector. Instead of getting our nets and heading off to collect butterflies, as per the game narrative, we invented a new religion on the spot and invited players to convert to the Cult of the Butterfly Collector. We began to worship the character with dance and ritual, using only text. As more players happened by our noob chars were soon surrounded and then, summarily executed. Kicked to death. We had become martyrs to the Cult of the Butterfly Collector. We returned to Vellis many times that day, being martyred again and again.

This theme was echoed a year or so later when the Second Front performed Martyr Sauce, one of our early pieces. Second Front, the first performance collective in the online world of Second Life, took the idea to a new level in this highly interactive new virtual environment. Our group of nine entered a user generated combat RPG sim. We arrived decked out in hippie gear with  free love  signs and peace particles, we handed out virtual spliffs. This time there were different responses to our presence, from bewilderment to appreciation to, once again, execution. We were martyred to the cause multiple times by bombs and machine guns.

Upside Down World   a hybrid reality performance by Liz Solo. Photos by Justin Hall. None
With collaborators in Second Front and the Avatar Orchestra Metaverse (a virtual orchestra) I explored the notion of virtual embodiment and the avatar body itself. I investigated the curious cultural phenomenon in Second Life of virtual pregnancy clinics where avatars can have a birth experience coded for them and deliver a full term healthy bot baby in a virtual clinic   all for a price, of course. As part of this project my avatar stayed pregnant for about two years (without the aid of any clinics) until finally giving birth (at home) to multiples, including many of my avatar friends, in the performance piece   Live Alien Home Birth, first presented at the Alternator Centre for Contemporary Art in Kelowna, BC..

When I first entered Second Life I was instantly put off by the consumerist nature of the space. So many shopping malls and sports cars and porn star avatars. But its dazzling customizability won me over in short order and this platform has yet to be bested in terms of users  ability to generate content. Further, any content created by a user belongs to that user. Over the years Second Life has evolved an artist s playground, housing a diverse and sophisticated creative community. It is a natural fit   an artist can create any space or object and script it to perform almost any action; the work is immersive; an artist can comment on the space, its nature, push its boundaries, make it crash. Then, streaming technology was introduced, becoming more and more sophisticated so that now any object in Second Life can stream any website or media feed. The real world has entered the virtual space.

In Second Life I have met artists from all over North America, Europe, Australia. I have connected with artists in China, South America and the Middle East. Through my collaborations with these artists I have performed, via the Internet, in corners of the globe I may never have accessed in several lifetimes of producing work. Through virtual spaces I have made meaningful connections with like minded artists everywhere. The overwhelming urge, now, after ten years working in virtual space, is to bring this virtual space back out into the real world, back to meat space. To merge realities. Hybrid- reality performance   bringing the real world in to the virtual and vice versa, is the current trend in digital performance. The merging of the metaverse with real space is quite inevitable, especially considering how quickly the technologies are advancing   only a few years ago we were constructing worlds with nothing but text. From the inside it has become clear that it is only a matter of time before the real and the virtual become inextricably intertwined.

What began as an investigation of the virtual game space as a performance platform has become something much bigger. I am a member of a community of avatars, avatars operated by human beings who are located all over the world. Deep friendships and working relationships have formed. Many of my online friends are more of a daily presence than many of my real world friends. Over time the urge to meet has seen many of us travel great distances to collaborate face to face. The world s problems have become more immediate, more personal. Places that were once far away are now next door. There are no borders between us in virtual space. Virtual space is a free space. In some ways it is the wild west, the unknown territory. Its boundaries are shifting, they can be pushed, breached, hacked. For some people in the world these virtual spaces are the only places anywhere for envisioning and experiencing a peaceful world.

Third Faction s  Demand Player Sovereignty . Image courtesy of artists. None
My virtual horizons expanded into World of Warcraft in 2009. I joined the Third Faction, a cabal of artists working to interrogate and expose the narratives and structures of gaming environments. We developed the /hug project and formed an NGO in the game to further ideas of tolerance and peaceful gameplay. Our most recent project Demand Player Sovereignty focusses on exploring virtual spaces as a medium for political resistance and social awareness. Our interventions and marches in World of Warcraft encourage real-world social change through in-world political action. We have been exploring ways to bring in-world action out into meat space with dual-world quests, some as simple as making a new friend or starting a conversation about peace.

A few weeks ago a group of artists converged in the new online environment DC Universe Online and we became the Super Art League. On March 3rd, 2012, the Super Art League, as well as the Second Front, will participate in the Low Lives: Occupy! event   an international platform for artists and others who support the Occupy movement. Low Lives: Occupy! will transmit live performances and interventions as they happen around the world. These events will happen simultaneously in real and virtual spaces and be projected and broadcast into venues all around the globe.

Upside Down World   a hybrid reality performance by Liz Solo. Photos by Justin Hall. None
Now is the time to be raising our voices within online virtual domains, these communities that we have built, (albeit upon corporately owned entertainment products), before our freedom to navigate within them is gone. Terms of Service, which must be agreed upon in order to enter any virtual environment, exist to protect corporate interests while controlling the social structures within which users must operate. Like the Third Faction s quest to subvert the factional conflict inside the game of WoW, we all inherently desire to control our own destiny and to exercise freedom within our communities, wherever those communities happen to exist.

 Process  is a heavy word in video game design.

Image taken from http://zobeide.debacle.us . Original game content by Robert Yang. None
It refers to procedurality, the ways in which a computer manipulates or generates data. It also refers to proceduralism, the idea that a video game is a formal system of rules and interactions, not a narrative nor a simple toy. Most often, it refers to the iterative process, the act of prototyping over and over again until the game is least awful. The game industry and nascent game development schools they sponsor would have you believe that best practice involves mastery of all three. They want you to think the act of making video games is some sort of art or science, an arcane magic performed only by hyper-literate and experienced masters.

And they re right. For now.

It s impossible for the game industry to make a game in a fit of anger; first you must research a demographic, focus-test a concept, then begin pre-production. By then, you won t remember what anger ever felt like.

It is impossible for the academy to make games; most of them don t know how. They ll tell you how a game influences society, but not how to influence society with games. They live in the past, reliant on the industry to do their research for them and to tell them what is possible.

It is impossible for the art world to even comprehend games. Narrative-based single player games, often demanding hours of playtime and hundreds of hours of game-literacy cannot be consumed in a public gallery. Meaning-making in the art world, for most people, is confined to reading short paragraphs printed on small white plaques affixed to walls.

But one day, video games will belong to people. Game development will not be art nor science nor wizardry, but a common pastime shared by millions. Children will sell video games on sidewalks for 25 cents each. Mothers will show their daughters the games they made with their grandmothers. The idea that only professional programmers can make games will seem as patronizing and insulting as the notion that only electricians can operate light switches.

That s one possible future of  process as pastime    a future that won t happen in our lifetimes. The art world, academy, and commercial game industry all have vested interests in rigidly defining the process of game development. That way, museums can stay relevant to young people under a banner of  new media,  universities can attract funding and students  tuition dollars, and advertisers can sell your attention to the highest bidders.

In this way, process is a heavy word   but also an unchanging word, a static word   a dead word, weighing down upon the living.

It is a human s job to be an artist.  It is the artist s job to think about an idea, to think about the self, to think about consciousness. When I think of process, it is the state or mode of being.  There is a harmonic connection of the artist between material, idea, and application.  At any relative point in an artist s production and process, we can interpret the object as a perception of the artist.  Upon this empathy, one can reflect on their own horizon lines of opinion and relate what is presented to them with what seems to be true.

The definition of  process  must encapsulate that feeling experienced while producing work. Artists  acute awareness seems to be rather unique; artists can project and produce something that isn t directly tangible. An artist s creation is produced from conceptual thought and abstract thought.  Knowledge (what the individual perceives in and as themselves) and the unknown (a phenomenal accumulation of things that have yet to be understood) are two great sources for artwork.  These two qualities seem to be contraries.  As an artist or viewer encounters something, be it known or unknown, they become more  familiar or less familiar with what is seen in direct proximity by cuing old relationships and experiences that are most similar, to the point the object is understood or misunderstood in it s own peculiar way by the viewer.  This comfort or discomfort that arises in the manipulator or viewer creates a dynamic relationship with each artistic object and is a crucial interaction for understanding the artistic practice.  Objects will be viewed with some sort of appearance or interpretation.  Unfamiliarity often makes stronger impressions on the viewer because the event becomes exploratory rather then of recollection.

Boethius notes. Digital media. None
The method and the medium may be particular of each individual artist.  Each artist s idea of what it takes to develop is different, but there may be a commonality of the particular cases of each artist, a type of common framework that could be considered for understanding.  This framework is the willingness to proceed under unexpected circumstances by making and arriving at a conscious choice.  If the choice is to be unconscious in method and application, possibly resulting in abstraction, then so be it still by choice of the artist.  Particular reasoning to the artist which address conceptual or aesthetic choice perhaps illuminate the truth of the matter within the artist and likewise, the resulted artwork.

Abstract landscape. Digital media. None
Congregations of people develop artisan conceptuality. In this sense, it s necessary to research influential ideas about creation in order to better understand reality s hints at truthful perception.  Everyday life is full of unknown truths; to communicate with those aspects of life grants opportunities of freedom from existing pattern and belief.

I d like to think that through analysis of artistic process, we will expose a fine line between experience and fact.  Artists are searching for everything new on a consistent basis.  Within these frameworks, theorists and practitioners make enormous discoveries towards the in-depth and interconnected construction of reality to discover the abstract nature of each individual s perceptions and how these individual perceptions can shed light on conceptions of what might be eventually known as a universal truth.

My name is John-Paul Real. And I am what some consider an artist. I have been drawn to art, and the artist lifestyle ever since I can remember, honestly.

I was about 4 years old. I remember learning how to read from Dr. Seuss s  Cat in the Hat , and being enthralled with the sheer wonders of colorful characters that he developed, as well as the interesting, and funny rhymes he would invent for his stories. But it was then that I truly found a love for art. The fact that someone could create not only these crazy words and rhymes, but the wonderful drawings as well, from their own mind, was certainly remarkable to me. Even at a young age. And from then on, I was on a secret mission to become an artist myself.

Image courtesy of the artist. None
My pen name is Mi$hap. This is because my father had the frame of mind that my brother and I were going to be sports stars when we grew up. So the fact that I fell in love with art, and wanted to begin a career as an artist, was somewhat of a mishap. Yet I decided to see where it could go for a while. And even though my father latched on to my drawing skills, I have a rebellious nature, and wandered away from art, and started getting more focused on sports activities such as football, skateboarding, and snowboarding. All the while, subconsciously wanting to make my name as an artist. Unfortunately, the skills I breached upon early in my teens, was let go of in high school to pursue other activities such as football, snowboarding, and social events. So my time for art was put on the back burner.

I always kept the love of art in my heart and mind though. And many times I would be inspired by so many things in life to go out and do something artistic. Events like concerts, traveling the country, sporting events, nature, etc., would always strike a chord in me to try and create something evocative of the inspirational subjects I heard, saw, felt. And it wasn t until about early 2007, that I decided to get back into my love of art, and the artistic process. My Mother had just passed away, and I was moved to start painting. Although I did not want to travel the common brush stroke route in creating a piece, I was always intrigued by graffiti, and spray art. So I decided to embark on trying a different method. I resorted to spray paint on canvas. Which I instantly fell in love with, and have continued to attempt to accomplish the images that I get in my mind on canvas.

Image courtesy of John-Paul Real. None
There really is no direct path I take when creating my projects. In fact, I usually get inspired by images I see driving down the road, and find a color scheme that fits the image I am trying to produce. Then it s finding the right size of canvas that will fit my objective. This mode of operation has made me realize that my  style  is better formatted for medium to larger canvases. My work is usually attributed to my love of music as well. Which in a sense, is the feeding force of my drive to finish a project. I love listening to loud music, preferably bass music, to excite me, and keep me moving to finish the project at hand.

In closing, there is no telling where my style will travel, and if and when I ever get satisfied with my own work, as I have a tendency to never really like the projects I finish. And merely want to do a better job each time. But one thing is certain, I LOVE doing it. It brings such a joy to my life. And in some instances, others as well. I probably won t ever stop this passion I have built up inside of me, and I m perfectly fine with that.

Before the writing instrument was born,  interactive fiction  essentially meant face-to-face conversation: one person speaks and the other reciprocates accordingly. Then came pen, paper, and the printing press fast forward a few hundred years and the personal typewriter transforms into the word processing computer. Technology has come a long way from the computing machines of the 1980s, and with the advent of the Internet, information sharing has lead to phenomenal bounds and leaps in both the creation and consumption of art. The written word of course, when done properly, is just as much of an art form as visual composition. The question at hand, however, is what constitutes the written art form in a rapidly changing and polymorphic digital landscape?

Game titled Zig Zag Flag Shag 1991 None
According to Assistant English Professor Dr. Lori Emerson of University of Colorado at Boulder, a born-digital literature piece must be an  artifact that generally must be read/viewed on a computer and also makes the most of what the digital medium has to offer  (L. Emerson, personal communication, February, 24 2011). This means that pieces of born-digital literature (also called digital fiction and e-lit) cannot be printed out and have the same effect; the use of code, flash, hypertext, and overall variability that comes with user interaction cannot be translated into the printed word. So, what does this mean to the computer savvy masses that make up the twenty-first century? Literacy is taken to a whole new level not only must we learn to read words, but we must learn how to read digital literature.

To review an attempt at defining this new form of literacy,  A [S]creed for Digital Fiction  written cooperatively by Alice Bell, Astrid Ensslin, Dave Ciccoricco, Hans Rustad, Jess Laccetti, and Jessica Pressman and housed in the Electronic Book Review establishes a  creed for the screen,  in an attempt to create guidelines for the exploration of digital fiction as well as to define what digital fiction is and is not. Divided into over twenty components, the [s]creed addresses topics ranging from its use of  close analysis  and  reading  to more digital-specific concepts like  cybersomatics and corporeality,   nodes,  and  topologies.  Though the [s]creed acknowledges that the act of reading is innately linear, the multilinearity of digital fiction s medium is also touted, relating to the ideas of multimedial and multimodal awareness in the genre itself. It is this added layer of complexity and accretion of meanings that define the overarching theme of this text, as well as the revolutionary attitude that digital fiction is something to be defined and examined in a very specific manner.



Screen from Nightingale s Playground 2010 None
Many questions, however, arise from such a [s]creed. Implicit in the title of this document is the limitation of genre; why fiction and not poetry? Will there be a different [s]creed for digital poetry, and if so, how will it be different, if at all? Throughout the document, the idea of the reader sitting in front of a screen with digital fiction on it accompanied by the clicking of a mouse already sounds outdated does this document cover touch screens and e-paper? In light of the constant changes in new technology, how can we ever keep up? Will new [s]creeds be made for different types of screens? A distinction is made between reading, watching, playing, and  experiencing  digital fiction. How is experience different from these other active verbs and can this apply to printed texts that incorporate aspects of interactive fiction (i.e. House of Leaves)? Certain diction choices in the [s]creed call to attention its assumptions and limitations as well; is this just a utopian academic manual for  us  and if so, who is this  us ? Does the use of the plural pronoun suggest that this [s]creed should be universal, even if digital fiction is not universal due to its modal limitations? Namely, the access to digital fiction is rarer than access to print fiction, which leads this document to be highly theoretical and hopeful that  we  as  experiencers  will constantly encounter digital fiction. Implicit in these issues is the perennial nature of constantly evolving technologies it took a few centuries for mankind to step up from the printing press to digital machines, but nowadays new forms of technology and communication are being pushed out every few months. Will this be a problem for English majors who want to embrace e-lit, yet have trouble keeping up with the methods of creation?

Despite these questions that shake the foundations of this [s]creed, it is still quite ambitious and useful in its scope, offering detailed definitions of the tenets of digital fiction and that for which it stands. Particularly significant is its listing of what digital fiction is not: blogs, e-books, and communitarian digital fiction. The cultural significance of having a definition of digital fiction and a way to decipher it is enormous because this reveals that the medium is shifting, and with every medium shift there must be a new paradigm to overlap with it and new scholars to define it.

I am confident that the definition of born-digital literature will stick around, and will gain momentum in the coming years. To many, born-digital literature is just another way to describe text-heavy new media pieces. That definition is not what matters here. It is how we, as readers, react to and interact with these works of art that reflect the mutable and developing nature of our digitally saturated world.

 what s It Doing in English Departments? What is (or are) the  digital humanities,  aka  humanities computing ? It is tempting to say that whoever asks the question has not gone looking very hard for an answer.  What is digital humanities?  essays like this one are already genre pieces.

Willard McCarty has been contributing papers on the subject for years (a monograph too). Under the earlier appellation, John Unsworth has advised us  what is humanities computing and what is it not.  Most recently Patrik Svensson has been publishing a series of well-documented articles on multiple aspects of the topic, including the lexical shift from humanities computing to digital humanities. Moreover, as Cynthia Selfe in an ADE Bulletin from 1988 reminds us, computers have been part of our disciplinary lives for well over two decades now. During this time digital humanities has accumulated a robust professional apparatus that is probably more rooted in English than any other departmental home.

Digital humanities, which began as a term of consensus among a relatively small group of researchers, is now backed on a growing number of campuses by a level of funding, infrastructure, and administrative commitments that would have been unthinkable even a decade ago. Even more recently, I would argue, the network effects of blogs and Twitter at a moment when the academy itself is facing massive and often wrenching changes linked both to new technologies and the changing political and economic landscape has led to the construction of  digital humanities  as a freefloating signifier, one that increasingly serves to focus the anxiety and even outrage of individual scholars over their own lack of agency amid the turmoil in their institutions and profession.

Whatever else it might be then, the digital humanities today is about a scholarship (and a pedagogy) that is publicly visible in ways to which we are generally unaccustomed, a scholarship and pedagogy that are bound up with infrastructure in ways that are deeper and more explicit than we are generally accustomed to, a scholarship and pedagogy that are collaborative and depend on networks of people and that live an active 24/7 life online. Is that not something you want in your English department?

I have said a few controversial things over the course of my career, and it seems to me that if you are so honored as to have other people talking about what you said, you should probably sit back and let people respond without trying to defend yourself against every countercharge.

But I am worried that my late remarks at MLA 11 are touching a nerve in a way that is not provocative (in the good sense), but blithely exclusionary. The particular remarks are as follows:

 Do you have to know how to code? I m a tenured professor of Digital Humanities and I say  yes.

 Personally, I think Digital Humanities is about building things [. . .] If you are not making anything, you are not . . . a digital humanist.

I suppose I could say that both of those quotes are taken out of context, but given that all quotes are by nature taken out of context, it does not seem exactly fair to protest. But just stating things like this (as I soon discovered) really does touch upon a number of anxieties both in Digital Humanities (DH) and among those who bid participation. I do not know if I can alleviate that anxiety. I am not even sure that I want to, insofar as some anxieties can be oddly productive. But there is a lot more to be said here.

I have had the pleasure of talking with lots and lots of people in DH from among a wide range of disciplines. And I have been having that conversation since the mid-nineties. I have discovered that there are lots of things that distinguish an historian from, say, a literary critic or a philosopher, and there are a lot of differences between 1995 and 2011. But to me, there has always been a profound   and profoundly exciting and enabling   commonality to everyone who finds their way to DH. And that commonality, I think, involves moving from reading and critiquing to building and making.

Clearly there is a great deal of interest (and consternation) over the  what is DH?  question. Personally, I have heard from a number of folks both here and on Twitter over the last twenty-four hours. Even though, as Stephen Ramsay was pointing out in a comment on my last post, this is a longstanding question, it is one that seems to be increasingly pointed, perhaps because, as others have noted, there are more and more folks interested in the term. The DH11 conference that initiated my last post is really just one, even reasonably minor, example of the issue.

I will not even attempt to account for the volume of discussion on this issue. However, I believe it is safe to say that  digital humanities  raises many more eyebrows than the term  humanities computing.  And this is a rhetorical issue to me. For example, if one looks at the Companion to Digital Humanities, the terms  digital humanities  and  humanities computing  are used interchangeably. Kirschenbaum s ADE article (which I cited in my last post as well) begins with the question,  What is (or are) the  digital humanities,  aka  humanities computing ?  He then traces a very specific genesis of the term  digital humanities  through an interview with John Unsworth, who he quotes:

 The real origin of that term [digital humanities] was in conversation with Andrew McNeillie, the original acquiring editor for the Blackwell Companion to Digital Humanities. We started talking with him about that book project in 2001, in April, and by the end of November we d lined up contributors and were discussing the title, for the contract. Ray [Siemens] wanted  a Companion to Humanities Computing,  as that was the term commonly used at that point; the editorial and marketing folks at Blackwell wanted  Companion to Digitized Humanities.  I suggested  Companion to Digital Humanities  to shift the emphasis away from simple digitization.

So there you go. I think it is undoubtedly the case that the term digital humanities was meant to mean humanities computing. It also seems clear that the switch was a rhetorical move. From this passage it is impossible to know if the term  digitized humanities  or  digital humanities  was thought to be more accurate in some epistemological, (inter)disciplinary, sense than  humanities computing,  or if the switch was intended as a way of creating a title that might have broader appeal. The reference to  marketing folks  makes me think the latter, but one can t be sure. Now someone who is not a rhetorician may think that is a kind of criticism, but it is not coming from me. The switch, in my view, would represent a belief on the part of the authors and editors regarding who they believe their audience should be. Digital humanities addresses that audience in a way that humanities computing does not.

Video games, when designed in a robust way, create a rich system of interactivity that empowers players. Through exploration and play, they develop a sense of their own agency within that system and, in some cases, a sense of the inner workings of that system: how it functions and their ability to change it. To perceive both the reaches and limits of interactive player power is to recognize the range of agency in video games. For example, a video game that constantly throws mandatory challenges at players can feel hostile and violent, whereas a game that allows players many creative opportunities can feel more open and free.

Photo by Marek Kapolka, courtesy Mojang. None
The differences between interactivity and agency aren t entirely clear, but one way of looking at it is to see an interaction as an atomic element one action and one reaction and agency as the sum of an agent s potential actions. More important, though, is to distinguish the aesthetics of interactivity and agency from the aesthetics of non-interactive elements within a video game. When creating an interactive system, there are necessary non-interactive elements that deliver information about the state of the system to the player. In a game, these might be avatars showing the position of the player characters or health bars displaying their physical state. These non-interactive elements have their own aesthetic and can contribute significantly to the overall feel of a game, but they do not necessarily indicate the level of agency for players.

In digital video games, the distinction between interactive and non-interactive elements is understood, respectively, in terms of  gameplay  and  visuals,   graphics,   sound,  etc. It is generally accepted, among gamers, that gameplay has a preeminent position among the other facets of a video game. A game that has very airy and lighthearted visuals can still feel claustrophobic if interactive player agency is too limited. The other facets are nice. They are a spectacle and can keep a game intriguing, but they are not a game s artistic raison d  tre. In other words, artists working in different media can express non-interactive ideas better than with video games, whereas artists working in the domain of games have the unique ability to advance ideas about interactive player agency.

Photo by Marek Kapolka, courtesy Nintendo None
Most gamers are not self-declared artists, however, and they do not share the same artistic goals. Games qua games exist as a platform on which to learn how to better manipulate and conquer the system of play. They provide an environment with rigidly defined rules, clear winning and losing conditions, and a limited set of potential actions that players can take. The players  goal is to become better at winning. The design ideal is to constantly present challenging problems that players must surmount, so that as they defeat the challenges they are bathed in exaltations.

To some video game artists, however, this myopic focus on challenge is asphyxiating. Although games are unique in their ability to provide this kind of confrontational, direct challenge, there is another potential paradigm to explore agency in terms of interactive aesthetics as an end in itself, rather than as a means to challenge players. Simply acting within a video game can provide an immense amount of aesthetic pleasure, even if those actions are not challenged by the hostile requirements of an antagonistic system or directed towards the completion of a mandated task.

The aesthetic potential of undirected interaction has been proven in several existing video games: for instance, jumping around aimlessly in the castle garden of Super Mario 64; carving out mines to build castles in Minecraft; or, driving around in Grand Theft Auto. Each of these undirected interactions, even if taken outside of the larger context of the game, would be interesting and engaging. However, for some reason when artists do venture to make a video game that sets aside the larger narrative and stacked challenges, such as in the case of Noby Noby Boy, critics accuse them of making something pointless, which raises the question: what s the point of a goal-driven game?

It should be self-evident that video games are a natural medium for activism. They free players from the patriarchal and infantilizing structure of the artist/audience hierarchy, giving the players active roles in forming the video game narratives. No longer are players passive recipients of the vision and knowledge of the artist since when were artists supposed to be listened to anyway?

Photo by anonymous, courtesy molleindustria None
Instead, video game artists can train players to acknowledge their own agency in a way that carries over from the virtual to the real world.
Measured against this activist standard, Every Day the Same Dream is an evil application of the medium. Depicted in the video game world is a poetic facsimile of the upper-middle class nuclear family, proceeding along the tedious course of a white-collar white man s life, and it is built in such a way that denies players any agency to change their subjected status.

Photo by anonymous, courtesy molleindustria None
Characters do not even have the ability to futilely resist. The most empowered actions the characters perform are  don t put on clothes  and  touch a cow.  This video game s message is clear: you cannot escape. The artists have consciously depicted their target player audience; who else but those who sympathize would spend their time on such a tedious video game? It seems an ironic gesture that the real world white-collar players are so controlled and subdued that they would never dream of rebellion within this virtual white-collar world. Even the most radical actions they can consider will lead them nowhere. Their only option is suicide, which many of their colleagues have already chosen. Every Day the Same Dream fails to pose any critical commentary on contemporary life. The video game introduces nothing to its players with which they do not already agree. It is a reckless perpetuation of the imagined mythic chains that bind them, pandering to purportedly disenfranchised players.

As if reinforcing the enslavement of its players was not enough, the video game also creates an internal hierarchy of its component media to keep established forces in control of the revolutionary. Video games can be seen as a gestalt comprised of elements of many other media: visuals, sound, plot, and interaction are some of the elements that contribute to the game as a whole. However, the interactive component of Every Day the Same Dream exists only as a means of displaying the non-interactive parts. When playing, the only reason the player continues is to watch the vignettes that serve as aglets for the shoestring paths of the video game. Controlling the character provides minimal interest for players.

This hierarchical infrastructure of media is by no means unique to this video game. It seems a common idea among certain types of video game artists and thinkers that, if passive art has such an established history, then games can only be art if they embrace this traditional mode of viewership. This tradition stems, in part, from the notion that art relies on the exact and genius vision of one artist who controls precisely what the viewers are supposed to see. If video games allow the players to make choices, the artist has given up this control. Not only is this an outdated definition of art   there are plenty examples of generative, participatory, systemic, and other art forms that require the artist to relinquish some degree of control over the finished product   it is also a completely inaccurate definition of video games.

Photo by anonymous, courtesy Tale of Tales None
Video game designers have absolute control over every action the player can perform within the bounds of the game, and any action the player takes that puts them beyond the realm of the game causes the player to cease playing the same game.

These passive video games are not solely coming from those working within the machinery of the mainstream culture industry. The most egregious offenders come from those who supposedly represent the avant-garde in video game design: self-professed conceptual artists like Tale of Tales and Jordan Magnuson, who have thought long and hard about the medium, separated themselves from external pressures, and all but declared that yes, it s clear, the future of video games as art is to do away with the player s agency. We re dreadfully sorry, but it just has to go   how else can video games be art? No other form of art lets you do things. It s for the best.
Using video games in this way demeans the potential of play and perpetuates the reign of passive art. Although it s fast becoming a truism, it bears repeating: there is a seemingly infinite amount of squandered potential in video games. Everyone seems to acknowledge this, but almost no one is doing anything to approach that potential, either because they are paralyzed by financial necessities, enjoy creating meaningless paracosms that satisfy mainstream tastes, or are stuck in the past, making video games that prostrate themselves in front of their non-interactive artistic predecessors.

In September 2010, the ZERO1 Biennial took place in San Jose, California. A symposium kicked off the Biennial. The title of this symposium was  Global Warning.  The goal of the symposium   put on by Leonardo, an international society for the arts, sciences and technology   was to suggest possible roles in which artists can participate in the discussion of climate change. The keynote speaker on the first day of the symposium was Dr. Kathleen Dean Moore. She presented the thesis from a book that she recently co-edited, called Moral Ground, Ethical Action for a Planet in Peril. This book is a compilation of short essays that give a variety of reasons why we, as humans, should save the planet. The essays came from scientists, environmentalists, activists, and even President Barack Obama.

Global climate change and art seem, at first glance, like strange bedfellows. Furthermore, why would a symposium organized around the role of artists in climate change invite a University of Oregon professor, who is not an artist, but rather a professor of environmental philosophy, to be the keynote speaker? The answer presented at the symposium was that artists informed about the environment can, hopefully, play a key role in helping people understand the implications of climate change.

Global Warming Symposium 2010 ZERO1 None


The argument that Moore summarized from the book Moral Ground is that we need to leave the planet for future generations the way we found it. The book lays out fourteen sections giving the various different reasons why we should save the planet for the future. In her keynote speech, Moore addressed why she was delivering this message to a group composed primarily of artists. Scientists are doing a good job of developing the data behind global warming; however, the collective behavior required to address climate change will require appealing to the moral conscience of society at large.  Addressing society s moral conscience must be done in more ways than just through presenting graphs and charts to the public. In the essay written by James Garvey, included in Moral Ground, Garvey writes,  Science can give us the facts, but we need something more if we want to act on the basis of those facts. The something more has at least a little to do with what we think is right, with justice, with responsibility, with what we value, with what matters to us.  The problem with scientific facts is that they are easily thrown into a proliferating data pile, to be processed later.

I often consider the question: why should we care about climate change? When I heard the lecture from Dr. Moore, I felt validated. The book argues that saving biodiversity and avoiding environmental tragedies caused by climate change is a moral issue. Are we okay with allowing the wonders of nature to disappear thanks to the lifestyles of those in the developed worlds? Are we okay with allowing those who have barely contributed to the cause of global climate change to bear the brunt of the consequences? These are the questions that the essays in Moral Ground strive to, perhaps not answer, but at least bring up for contemplation.

At the end of the section titled  Yes, because the world is beautiful,  authors discuss art as a way to encourage people to appreciate the beauty in nature. Let artists celebrate the natural beauty of the world: paint sea otters or octopi on garbage bins and blank walls; replace elevator music with broadcasts of whale songs; paint icebergs over advertisements on city buses (as San Francisco has done this to four of their city buses); or, amplify the crooning music of barn owl nests, rather than Frank Sinatra, in the city square.

Pure science alone is not enough of a call to action. This is because science, for many people, is too abstract. They need something more concrete to understand why they need to care. Art can fill that gap. While not the primary focus of Dr. Moore s book, this is the primary reason why Leonardo asked her to be the keynote speaker at the  Global Warning  symposium.

For many of us, especially those who live in suburbia away from the wonders of nature, it is easy to forget the important role that nature plays in our lives. A sense of wonder about nature must be brought back to our lives. This is difficult to do in a society that puts so much emphasis on consumerism. In developed countries especially, where a majority of the world s resources are being directed, steps need to be taken to make people more aware of what is at stake so they will try to limit their ecological footprint. In the essay by Vucetich, included in Professor Moore s book, he says,  Think about knowledge that makes you go  Wow!  Wow, that s so beautifully complicated Wow, look how magnificently nuanced Wow, how astonishingly connected. Wow: to be held in a state of wonder about nature.  This is the sort of response that is needed in order to get people to start thinking about the consequences of global climate change. Artists have often been thought of as being able to spark this  wow  reaction in viewers.

While science makes amazing strides and changes in specialized fields of knowledge, when it comes to translating scientific data into social change, statistics and research articles are not going to cut it. If we continue on the current path, we might be fine for a while. This notion makes it easy for current generations to kick the problem down the road to future generations. I agree with the premise of Moral Ground, that in order to accomplish serious social change, scientists must connect with people s consciences. This happens oftentimes through religion and sometimes art. Contemporary art has functioned in large part as a cultural critique, and it can remind us of the beauty that we overlook. While art alone will not solve the problem of getting people to change their behavior, artists can help by starting the conversation. As the essays in Moral Ground explain, the conversation must be followed by action.

Human beings desire frameworks. The birth of language, both written and spoken, was driven by our need to create a framework for our thoughts, a common scaffolding upon which we can share our ideas, and a way for us to understand each other. Human beings also desire tools. This desire drove the birth of modern technology and global communication networks. We eagerly build these tools, using them to extend and augment ourselves. They allow us to interact with and manipulate the world in ways never before imagined. Our tools and frameworks define how we see ourselves and they define how we see the world as we shape it around us.
New media lives at the intersection of all these tools and frameworks, coalescing as a new language of digital imagery and symbols, a new constellation of technological tools for building global communities and sharing knowledge. But at the end of the day, we are still human beings. We are bound by our biology and our evolutionary roots.

Our minds developed over millennia as we strove to survive in a physical world that was mysterious and challenging, which is of course why we developed such a strong desire to create tools and frameworks in the first place to help us understand and shape the physical world. This is why the new media of virtual worlds is so compelling.
Immersing ourselves perceptually in virtual world environments initially seems like the ultimate detachment from what it means to be human. It seems like a synthetic imitation, without substance yet simulating substance, our identities embodied as avatars walking across the streets of cities that do not exist. Yet, there is a deep resonance in this perception. We understand virtual worlds as we understand the physical world. We understand the idea of people and places within those worlds. Something ancient in our minds silently clicks into place and our minds begin to interpret the virtual world as real. It feels real and we feel real within it.
Virtual worlds exist today most commonly as video games. They also exist as open-ended creative platforms without predefined goals. As a canvas for new media expression, they provide new opportunities for engaging people in perceptually immersive experiences. New languages for storytelling and artistic expression unfold with new affordances. Advances in technology will only make these virtual worlds more perceptually immersive.

We will eventually be able to lose ourselves in environments that fully engage all of our senses. At some future point in time, we will not be able to tell the difference between the virtual experiences and the physical ones. Distinctions between virtual and real will be meaningless.
In this way, the virtual world metaphor will collapse into a new shared reality. As we approach that point, we will be coming full circle: back to fulfilling our basic human desires to explore, understand, and shape the world around us, back to our needs to explore new worlds with other people, back to what makes us most human.

OdysseyOdyssey is a simulator in the online world of Second Life devoted to presenting contemporary art and performance. Odyssey provides studio space to dozens of artists and features continuous online exhibition space for installation and performance work. The simulator is currently co-managed and co-curated by Yael Gilks (Fau Ferdinand) and Liz Solo (lizsolo Mathilde).

Pyewacket Kazyanenko@TheGateShanghai None


Experiencing an artwork as an avatar in a virtual space is different than viewing it on a screen or reading about it after the fact. You kind of have to be there. When one spends time in a simulated environment, the landscape of the mind and the landscape of the machine merge somehow, leading to sensory immersive experiences. In an effort to bridge/blur the space between the real and virtual worlds, many online artists are creating pieces that involve both the virtual and live performance spaces simultaneously sometimes called  hybrid-reality  or  mixed reality  events.

At the 2010 Odyssey Performance Art Festival, Los Angeles-based Micha Cardenas (Azdel Slade) and Elle Mehrmand (echolalia Azalee) presented Virus.Circus. using wearable electronics, sensors, and audio to bridge virtual and physical spaces. The performers  heartbeats and voices were monitored and streamed from a local art galleryinto Second Life as they and their avatars performed intimate actions in both places: via soft sensors, the movement of the performers in the gallery space effected the movement of the avatars in virtual space. A large-scale projection in the gallery allowed local audiences to experience the work from both perspectives.

*SecondFront@TheGateShanghai None


Dozens of artists around the world present work simultaneously in both physical gallery and virtual Odyssey spaces over a 24 hour period. nora Furlough conceived Zeitgeist for the Muro Gallery in Geneva also using mixed reality as its central concept. She streamed live video from the Muro Gallery into the Second Life space and vice-versa. In another experiment,  Real Virtual Games   Participatory Mixed Reality Performance by Isabel Valverdeand and Todd Cochrane, dancers in the Muro Gallery improvised choreography in response to the real-time movement of avatars in  Second Life.

Live streaming was also central to a recent Odyssey presentation of The Gate by Yannick Antoine and Yves Bernard which ran for six weeks as part of the 8thShanghai Biennale creating an intersecting point between Odyssey and China s Shanghai Art Museum. Scores of gallery goers in Shanghai peered into a window to Odyssey and many online performers took the opportunity to present new work for these new audiences. Some viewers misunderstood the interface and language barriers made it challenging to communicate with them. There were also periods of dead space punctuated only by the appearance of the Shanghai security guard shuffling past the camera on his rounds. Limitations of virtual exhibition space are continuously being exposed by artists pushing the parameters of live performance. The technology is still rife with glitches but crashes, lag, and time delays; all the unknown elements that come from pushing the technology s potential are part of the nature of the beast.

Odyssey was founded in 2005 by the avatars known as Sugar Seville and Pacino Hercules (Marcus Markou). The pair met in-world and knew that the Second Life interface held great potential for artists and their creative processes. Markou decided to purchase the simulator as an experiment and Seville then became the driving force in establishing Odyssey as an arts community. She curated the first 3 years of exhibits and invited scores of performance artists to present work, building Odyssey into a network of over 600 people. Much beloved, Seville worked tirelessly for Odyssey until her departure in 2008 when she passed the reigns to Helfe Ihnen at an online public meeting of community members. Ihnen went on to deftly maintain and curate the simulator for two years, during which time Seville disappeared from Second Life. Her real life identity remains a mystery to this day. Markou says,  She was a great source of creative spirit. I still don t know who she is   in real life   and I really like that. She s like a virtual muse.  For over five years, Odyssey enjoyed financial sponsorship from the UK-based Dynamis Media Group. It was in December 2010 that Markou announced their intention to move on:

 Dynamis got involved because we genuinely wanted to see how virtual worlds would impact on how information is shared. Second Life preceded the craze that was Facebook and Twitter. At the time, I thought Second Life would become an embedded part of everyday life for most people. That never happened, largely because of Facebook.

Despite this (or perhaps because of it), Second Life remains a viable meeting and workplace for an international community of artists. In January 2011, 16 members of the Odyssey group came forward to pool resources and take over the costs of the simulator. Odyssey has, in essence, evolved into an artist-run virtual space.

In its sixth year of existence a long time in virtual years Odyssey, like the Metaverse (another virtual space), is in a continuous state of flux. When developers invest time and energy into a virtual world, building communities upon a social platform, it is healthy to remember that these worlds are transient and changeable, and ultimately controlled by corporations, which use them for advertizing as they use other social networking sites. Every incarnation is a stepping-stone in creating the next virtual world.

New synthetic environments are continuously being introduced via Odyssey and many of these artists are also exploring other virtual spaces, including Open Sim environments (virtual spaces run with Open Source programming on independent servers). The Craft simulators are based on Second Life s Open Source Linden Scripting Language (LSL) and Odyssey recently opened a sister island there. Odyssey on Craft is a brand new frontier ripe with possibilities, now slowly being animated with the content of early pioneers.

Artists will continue seeking the boundaries of Odyssey and pushing to go beyond them. The many manifestations of work involving hybridity reflect visions of the not so distant future when virtual spaces will not be separate from real space, will not be viewed through a screen or special interface, but incorporated into the real world.

American minimalist artist Donald Judd wrote about the new installation work in the 1960s that:

Selavy Oh and DC Spensley at Brooklyn is Watching None
In the physical world, artists have many different materials to work with (clay, stone, paint, chalk, fabric, metal, etc.), each material having a set of effective techniques for conversion into art. By contrast, in virtual environments artists have one material to work with the prim (primitive object) but almost incalculable ways of manipulating its form and behavior. The multiple components of the art discipline that is developing in 3D virtual environments necessarily derive from that premise.

First and primarily, artists working in virtual environments must be comfortable manipulating, combining, and rotating three-dimensional objects directly within the virtual space (if possible), and using various three-dimensional rendering programs on their computers. Next, any artist intending to use textures must develop some familiarity and skill with image processing programs and image file formats. And, if intending to texture sculpted prims, must be able to map those images onto three-dimensional shapes using UV maps and other tools. In addition, artists seeking the ability to control the behavior of objects, or to make them responsive to various forces and entities within the virtual space must gain some familiarity with scripting, which can in itself become a serious discipline. Other useful skills include audio editing and processing for artists interested in using sound in their work; video and still image capturing and editing to document and exhibit the work outside of the virtual environment; real-time motion capture techniques for artists interested in using avatar animations in their work; and so forth.

I propose that a distinction be maintained between art that is  native  or  vernacular  to 3D virtual environments, and art that is first created in the physical world and then imported into virtual environments for display. Exciting developments in virtual world art making occur only when the art making process and all the discoveries artists make during that process manifests fully within the virtual environment itself. Additionally, I feel that the losses experienced in the exchanges between environments are so great that artworks transformed for viewing outside their respective  native  environments sustain damage to the extent that they literally can no longer be seen, and so are not appropriate for critical appraisal or any kind of meaningful discussion.

In drawing such a distinction, like Judd stated in the 1960s, I do not claim that artwork made in online virtual environments constitutes some kind of movement or direction. I would claim, however, that a specificity of differentiated art practice is developing based on a discipline that is unique to and closely correlated with online virtual environment experiences. If we consider those experiences, when embodied fully by participants, as constituting a kind of  post-human  awakening, where we embrace  the [liberating] possibilities for disembodied communication and exploration presented by cyberspace , then artists will be more prepared     to think carefully about how these technologies can be used to enhance human well-being and the fullness and richness of human-being-in-the-world    as they go about their business of creating new ways to make and exhibit art.If we consider those experiences, when embodied fully by participants, as constituting a kind of  post-human  awakening, where we embrace  the [liberating] possibilities for disembodied communication and exploration presented by cyberspace , then artists will be more prepared     to think carefully about how these technologies can be used to enhance human well-being and the fullness and richness of human-being-in-the-world    as they go about their business of creating new ways to make and exhibit art.. In these virtual environments, art making becomes at once a discipline wherein agency exists and artists seek to  get clear of these forms  left behind in the physical world they also inhabit. And in the same sense, a new critical practice, solely focused on the unique characteristics of online virtual environments and on the art made there seeking to  get clear of these forms  must arise if meaningful discourse about  native  virtual art is considered imperative to its ongoing development.

Some people may ask themselves, "Why would I want to know about an artist named Dan Peterman? What personal benefits can be accomplished by being familiar with his work, and what can I learn from his artwork?" Well, if you care about your self, you probably care about the people around you, your community, and you are aware of the way we are dependent on our environment as an ecosystem with resources to be used in a way that are beneficial to you, the people around you, and the world we live in. Dan Peterman is one such artist that cares more about a mutual relationship with his community and environment than he does about "the competition and parasitism associated with a capitalistic mentality." (7) It is not part of his personality to step up and preach about of the cause and effect of capitalist society on the ecosystem we live in. After all, he has gained much popularity in european countries by bringing a critique to what he describes as "a waste stream that is inevitably produced by the capitalist society focused on the consumer." (7) In a side step to an activist, who spends most of the time fighting slow moving bureaucratic forces, Dan Peterman bypasses the bureaucrats and projects his thoughts in the public forum of the art word. A place that allows the fuller meaning of professionalized activism to unfold. (17) His situational strategies to making art with recycled materials like plastics, metals, and even compost all speak to the viewer in a way that doesn't judge, but simply says, "This is mutualism" In this sense, Peterman defines mutualism as "a symbiotic relationship that works to the long-term benefit of both parties." (2) A relationship between Ecology and human interaction.

Dan's work seems to consistently invite people to make use of his work in a way that creates a public functionality to objects and materials that would otherwise be discarded as useless. In this way he invites the viewer to experience a small transformation of ideas with a paradigm that says, "Hey, I can reuse this instead of throwing it away." For example, his work titled "Bottle Cap Pasta" was created simply by rolling out a flat layer of pasta dough, and pressing a bottle cap into the dough to create small folded noodles for a pasta dish. My favorite work by Peterman is a beautifully crafted pair of green sunglasses titled, "Shades of Green", 1993. It is made of recycled green glass, and has a green case made of recycled plastic lemonade bottles. (8) What I find so creative in this piece is his effort to nudge the viewer toward both a literal and symbolically "green" vision of the world. It is poetic in it's powerfully symbolic message, yet very practical in the eyes of a consumer, his target audience.

Dan's inspiration comes from a long history with a place called the Resource Center. A place created by recycling pioneer Ken Dunn. Dan first wandered in there as a graduate student looking for materials for his artwork on the outskirts of his college, the University of Chicago. After he graduated with a MFA, he worked for Dunn and the Resource Center in exchange for use of a space inside the site as a studio. Dunn paid Peterman less than minimum wage as he picked up recyclable materials from his neighboring communities. He recalls it as a "waste stream" in America. (6) Inevitably inspiring works like "Running Table", a 100 foot picnic table and benches made of reprocessed, post-consumer plastic. A short distance away, he made a 3,500 square foot public dance floor, made of post consumer plastic titled, "Chicago Ground Cover." These projects were exhibited in Chicago's A. Montgomery Ward Garden in 1997, giving new light to the meaning of plastic. (13)

Dan Peterman's greatest project is something he prefers not to call an art project at all. In 1994 he found himself in a sequence of events that allowed him to purchase the whole site of his studio from Ken Dunn. (13) He has since transformed this place into an incubator for what would later become a not-for-profit building called the Experimental Station. He chose to use this space to better the community in ways other than just renting the space to like minded artists, because that sort of monoculture is "an impoverishment, and diminishment of possibilities."(13) Tragically before his project became fully mature, a fire ripped through it on April 25, 2001. He then used every resource and connection he had to get a permit to rebuild the site, quoting Frank Lloyd Wright by saying, "...the fire of many long-honored ideals shall go down to ashes to reappear, phoenix like, with new purposes." -- "The Art and Craft of the Machine."

I see Dan Peterman as a pillar of his community who's "uncompromising commitment to humanity" (15) has turned a strongly localized inspiration into international exhibitions, including Berlin, Munich, Gathernberg, Edinburgh, Grenoble, Basel, New York, among other venues. He has touched the lives of many people in a creative and practical way that is mutually beneficial to all factors involved, including the environment. For example, he converted a VW van into a warm place for some homeless people by pouring compost onto it in the winter time. The decomposition of the soil created heat which warmed the inside of the van. I find it to be an interesting coincidence that this project was in close proximity to a community garden with a mysteriously rich soil that flourishes at the Experimental Station. It suggests that sometimes he will even recycle some of his own work. When I look at the concepts of his work I see a very powerful message that critiques capitalism in a way that is hard for me to ignore. It makes me think of capitalism as a single collective being with a propensity toward excessive wastefulness, born from the intelligent and inventive individuals that make up America. Dan Peterman is one of these intelligent people, born in a capitalist society, that has the audacity to push back against the obviously wasteful culture that everyone is aware of. What separates Peterman from this institution in America's "waste stream" is his ability to comment in a public forum about one man's ability to turn this waste into a powerful force of reusable consumption. I am not saying that a capitalist society is inherently stupid, nor do I think that Dan Peterman is saying that either. He has chosen to live in America as his permanent residence. A place that allows him to make the Experimental Station a reality with his wife, and two children. In my eyes, Peterman is simply living the life he feels good about as a human being. As a capitalist society, we have a lot to learn by understanding the mutualist artwork and lifestyle of Dan Peterman.

Note: As I write this, months of logistical, administrative, and bureaucratic preparations are being finalized so that a surplus, used, FEMA travel trailer can be donated to the MIT Visual Arts Program and delivered to the site of an old paint factory on the MIT Campus. The FEMA Trailer is set to arrive at MIT on April 30, 2008.

The FEMA Trailer is the focal point of a course I teach called "Understanding the Problem: Research as Artistic Practice," a series which was originally conceived by Ute Meta Bauer, Curator, Associate Professor, and Director of the MIT Visual Arts Program in the Department of Architecture. THE MIT FEMA Trailer Project is the first module in the "Understanding the Problem" series which seeks to examine how research, in the context of artistic practice, can be a tool for understanding contemporary issues.

The FEMA Trailer is at the center of many controversies related to environmental justice, government actions, and psychosocial health that have been unveiled in the wake of Hurricane Katrina. In this article I will describe the MIT FEMA Trailer Project and discuss the framework and methodology adopted to understand the "problems" of the trailer. The Project is still in its infancy, so the framework and methodology are a rough guide to the project's trajectory, which I expect will evolve significantly over time. As such, I welcome any feedback or comments. My contact information can be found at the end of this article.
As an introduction to a central theme of the FEMA Trailer Project, I will present another project that I am working on concurrently, N=1=0=Infinity.

N=1=0=Infinity: The Infinity Mushroom, Burial Suit, and Embalming Solution
N=1=0=Infinity is a burial system for the composting of corpses. The project, a work-in-progess, will take two forms:

1) the design and production of a new hybrid mushroom, the Infinity Mushroom which will facilitate the decomposition of corpses, remediation of accumulated toxins from corpses, and the delivery of corpse nutrients to plant roots. The Infinity Mushroom will be a genetic hybrid of mushrooms which individually feature abilities to utilize ammonia and/or nitrate and remediation mushrooms which target common toxins accumulated in the body over a lifetime,

2) the Infinity Burial Suit, a fitted burial suit embroidered with thread that is infused with Infinity Mushroom mycelium (prototype pictured), accompanied by the Infinity Embalming Fluid, a slurry containing Infinity Mushroom spores
The Environmental Working Group's Human Toxome Project and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's Biomonitoring Program are two initiatives which monitor the levels of industrial chemicals and pesticides accumulated in the body, known as "body burden." The Human Toxome Project's EWG/Commonweal Study #1 found 171 of 214 industrial compounds in the blood and urine of 9 adult participants, including chemicals linked to birth defects and developmental delays, immune system toxicity, and cancer. In this study, 44% of the group had high levels of chlorinated dioxins and furans, while 56% had moderate levels. Chlorinated dioxins and furans are produced as contaminants or byproducts in industrial manufacturing, human exposure is generally through digestion of contaminated foods--generally high fat foods such as dairy, eggs, and animal fats, and elevated levels of these chemicals are associated with immune system sensitization and allergies, birth defects and developmental delays, and cancer (http://www.ewg.org/sites/humantoxome/participants/participant-group.php?group=bb1).
Body burden is proof of the physical connection between the self-body and the planet--the industrial toxins we insert into the planet eventually find their way into our bodies through food, water, air, and manufactured objects. At the same time, the body is the symbol of our immortality, so we distance ourselves from our bodies in order to be protected from the harsh reality that we are animals who urinate, defecate, die, and decay. Modern sanitation systems are designed to instantly whisk away the unpleasant, frequent reminders of our mortality, our urine and feces. We squander potable water and energy to dispose and disinfect our waste which could otherwise fertilize our soil. Contemporary western funerals prescribe embalming the body in formaldehyde and sealing it in a casket. Originally intended to facilitate the return of soldiers' deceased bodies during the Civil War, today the purpose of formaldehyde embalming is to inhibit decay so that open casket viewings are possible. In this final act, we commit our last injustice to the planet--the creation of toxic burial sites and the denial of the planet's right to our body's stored, accumulated energy and nutrients. The cultural denial of death demands a disconnect between self-body and planet, which in turn has negative consequences for the environment. The
The Infinity Mushroom proposes an alternative relationship between the self-body and the planet. The intimate, physical connection between self-body and planet made evident by the acumulation of environmental toxins in the body, is contrasted with the psychological divide between self-body and planet via the mechanism of death denial. N=1=0=Infinity concedes human abuse of the environment which has allowed industrial pollutants to enter our bodies and proposes a method of reintegrating the self-body-planet while at the same time providing a practical tool for ecological burial. Human toxicity becomes, in essence, an instrument for the reconnection of self, body, and planet.

TERROR MANAGEMENT THEORY AND ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY: Reconciliation of the Self, Body, Death, and the Environment
In William James' configuration of the self, the body is relegated to a secondary role. According to James, the self is dialogical--the self as knower ("I") perpetually overseeing the self as known ("Me"). The body is the "innermost part of the material self" which happens to be one of four "constituents" of an even larger three parts of the "Me". The boundary between the self and not-self is thus defined not in physical terms but rather in ephemeral thought (1890).

Yet in much of psychology's history, the body has played a significant role in the development, construction and ongoing negotiation and development of the self. In Lacan's Mirror Stage, the infant begins to develop a sense of an "ideal-I" as a result of seeing its reflected body. D.W. Winnicott and others believe the body to be the physical boundary of the self (1965). Fisher argues that the psychological boundary of the self is rooted in the experience of the body (1986). Antonio Damasio and other cognitive psychologists propose that the self is merely a checking system of physiological states (2003). Terror Management Theory posits that because the body is a constant reminder of mortality, we engage in efforts to regulate the body in order to elevate the body from animal status to that of cultural symbol, thereby minimizing our vulnerability to death (Goldenberg and Pyszczynski, et.al, 2000).
In The Denial of Death, Ernest Becker argues that the struggle for heroism is central to human nature, based on "organismic narcissism" and our innate need for self-esteem, and is a reaction against the fear of death: "Society itself is a codified hero system, which means that society everywhere is a living myth of the significance of human life, a defiant creation of meaning." Our existential fears are centered around the body, the symbol of our mortality. Becker writes: "[T]he existential dilemma, the essence of man: we are half animal, half symbolic." This duality of body and conscious self is irreconcilable, for "[H]is body is a material fleshy casing that is alien to him in many ways" the strangest and most repugnant way being that it aches and bleeds and will decay and die." (1973)

Psychologists Jeff Greenberg and Todd Pyszczynski developed Terror Management Theory (TMT) in homage and response to Beckers work. Goldenberg and Pyszczynski,et.al. (2000) argue that because the body is a constant reminder of mortality, we engage in efforts to imbue the body with meaning in order to elevate the body from animal status to that of cultural symbol, thereby minimizing our psychic vulnerability to death.

Ernest Beckers Denial of Death and Terror Management Theory suggest that the body and self/soul are somehow separate entities that are connected but at odds with one another. The body perpetually asserts itself via excrement, hunger, pain, exhaustion, and sexual desire. The self attempts to elevate itself into a symbol of transcendence, one that is immortal and therefore immune from the smells and tastes of the (lesser) mortal body.
Ecopsychology proposes that the best antidote to environmental degradation and the alienation and "false identity" created by the urban-industrial system is a recovery of the ecological unconscious, the fundamental connection between humans and nature located at the "core of the mind" (1978). According to Theodore Roszak the ecology movement today is poorly equipped to bring about significant change in our relationship with the environment, because it relies on fear and guilt, extrinsic factors, in its efforts to motivate individuals to change rather than desire and interest, intrinsic factors. The answer lies in a blending of self and planet:
Ecopsychology holds that there is a synergistic interplay between planetary and personal well-being. The term "synergy" is chosen deliberately for its traditional theological connotation, which once taught that the human and divine are cooperatively linked in the quest for salvation. The contemporary ecological translation of the term might be: the needs of the planet are the needs of the person, the rights of the person are the rights of the planet. (Roszak 1992)

In addition to a blending of identities, Roszak also argues that a shift in attention must occur:
What the modern cultural environment has required of us is an enormous extroversion of attention and energy for the purpose of reshaping the Earth into a global industrial economy. For two centuries we have been subordinating the planet and our deepest personal needs to that project. This great act of collective alienation, I have suggested, lies at the root of both the environmental crisis and individual neurosis. In some way, at some point, a change of direction, a therapeutic turning inward, had to take place within a culture as maniacally driven as ours has been by the need to achieve and conquer." (1988)

Although it carries much folk wisdom, ecopsychology lacks any substantial grounding in the discipline of psychology and is often confused, in both Roszaks writings and public perception, with psychiatry, pop psychology, and various New Age practices. Joseph Reser challenges social psychologists in particular to develop and revive the field of ecopsychology with more dynamic constructions of the self as a step towards understanding how self-construal and environmental stewardship are related. "...what is needed is a cogent analysis of how individual behaviour interfaces with global and localized environmental problems, and an adequate, multilevel assessment of the determinants of individual and collective behaviour." (1995).
An integration of existing psychological frameworks of the 'self,' Terror Management Theory, and ecopsychology presents the beginnings of a useful construction of the self that can be applied to ecopsychology. The universal fear and denial of death, the impetus for the disconnect between self and body, must be reconciled in order for self-body-planet to merge. This split between body and self as a result of fear of ones mortality is echoed in the difficulty of marketing ecological burials to the public. "There's a cultural barrier to green burial in mainstream culture," says Kim Sorvig, a landscape architect at the University of New Mexico who serves as an advisor to the Green Burial Council. "We have a detachment or denial about people dying. You can go your entire life and never be confronted with the actual facts of death." Sorvig says planning for conservation burial can change the way people view their own deaths, and thus their lives. "People are depriving themselves of important psychological or spiritual connections by playing along with the idea of death embedded in the conventional culture. This offers great potential for engaging people now and helping them connect with the cycle of birth and death as a part of human ecology -- it's a very meaningful use of the earth"

N=1=0=Infinity proposes a possible model of the self-body-environment understood through the medium of death.

FEMA Trailer Project: An Eco-social Approach to Understanding the Problem, A Transformation
"We will not ever use trailers again," FEMA Director David Paulison, at a press conference in New Orleans with Center for Disease Control Director Julie Gerberding, on Thursday, Feb 14, 2008

Just before and after Hurricane Katrina struck the Gulf Coast of the United States in late August 2005, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) purchased 143,752 travel trailers and mobile homes largely through no-bid contracts, at an average of $18,620 each with a total cost of $2.7 billion. Between 90,000 and 120,000 units were occupied by storm victims across Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama, leaving a surplus of approximately 8,420 brand new, fully furnished, never-used mobile homes. As a result of this surplus and the return of used FEMA trailers, FEMA had 60,000 trailers in storage nationwide, sitting in rented parking lots as of early 2007. Months after FEMA deployed the travel trailers in 2005, some residents began to complain of respiratory problems associated with formaldehyde off-gassing in the trailer. Moreover, social ills plague trailer communitiesmental health problems are significantly higher in FEMA communities than in other areas in the Gulf Coast.

We seem, as a human family, to be on an unprecedented precipice. We have headed down a road called "progress" based on people as units of production. For sure, on this journey, we have created solutions to challenges facing the human species. Yet, somehow, building systems based solely on production has led us away from our deep and vital interconnection as a symbiotic relationship with the Earth and one another. On the progress path, we have begun to see ourselves as separate from and different than, rather than part of a powerful and profound interconnected whole. This disconnect, I call, "Separation Syndrome." It is the disease of disconnected consciousness. This disease has manifested to a crisis level - we are facing the possible extinction of the human species - and at the very least, a huge devastation to life as we know it.

This precipice, though, is a gift if we look to it as a wake up call - a call to action. It is the call to reconnect, redesign, and reclaim our potential. Seen through a spiritual and creative lens, it is the opportunity to redefine ourselves and our society as people of purpose, not just units of production.
Recognizing this, we begin to think differently, and therefore, creatively. To solve the problems facing the human family, it requires us to be creative beyond limiting thoughts, beliefs, and systems - in other words, to create or rather, recreate, our relationship with ourselves, the Earth, and one another. Life itself is a creative process. Therefore, activism, in order to be relevant, must be a creative process.
Anywhere in Nature that there is stagnation, there is an unhealthy system. The same is true for our minds. I know that "meaning" only exists in our minds. We create meaning. It is not arbitrary; it is as fluid and diverse as the art we create and the lives we live. Knowing this, we can create meaning that heals, beautifies, and strengthens our world.
To create, we use tools and resources. Technological tools are evolving at a rate that humans can barely keep up with. Get a technological tool today, it will be "new and improved" in a few months. Technology in and of itself is benignit is given meaning and life by how we create it, with it, what we use it for, and how it might end up using us (for example, the amount of time people spend on computers to connect with one another instead of connecting in person.)

Technology is a tool. As with all tools, it can be used to hurt or heal, to destroy or restore, to overwhelm and devastate or inspire. Technology at its best takes not only from the intellect of our brains, but also the courage to honor the powerful wisdom of the heart. One example is the difference between nuclear power plants and everyone replacing lights with energy-efficient light bulbs (which the energy saved would make it completely unnecessary to build another nuclear power plant.) Both nuclear power plants and energy efficient light bulbs involved a creative process, only one hurts (radioactive for thousands of generations to come) and one heals.
At this critical time, rethinking our place in and relationship with this Cosmos is vital. This creative thought process has led to a "green" movement. "Green" is to remember that we are not separate from the Earth. Rather, to remember that we come from this Earth and return to it. That every single breath we take literally connects us to everything that ever has been, is, and ever will be. And this isnt just some philosophical idea; this has been proven scientifically. What we do to the Earth, we do to ourselves.

Utilizing "green" concepts, ideas, and materials demands that we think "outside the box" which is what creativity is all about. It calls us to view our lives and our world from a unique perspective. This perspective, both figuratively and literally, creates an expansive view for us to create from. It becomes the living embodiment of a co-creative process.
So, in the face of massive erratic climate change, loss of biodiversity, extinction of species and cultures, pollution of air and water, and the seeming never-ending list of crisis, as artists, we have the opportunity to create solutions on a scale like never before.

I have been drawing, writing poetry, and crafting since I was about 3 years old. Not surprisingly, I have never viewed myself or the world in a linear or boxed way. I am designed to experience and express through a creative lens. Creative expression has also helped me work through my feelings of deep grief and rage as a result of witnessing, experiencing, and feeling the impact of what we are doing to the Earth and to ourselves.
Our lives - life itself - is a call to create, create, create. When we create with connected consciousness, we weave a fabric of profound beauty, inspired innovation, celebration of diversity, and in the process strengthen the whole - of which we are a magical part. The only limits are the ones we self-impose. In the space of connected creation, anything is possible - even miracles.


Introduction by Danielle Siembieda

Moving forward into changing networks, ecosystems and technology all can be combined, intertwined and complimentary. Using the concept of the network, the profile and the dialogue Curtis Baffico has created a visualization of personal responsibility by webbing the need and the have while visualizing networks of users through the interface of the personal collector, one that turns personal network into a commodity to fund the efforts of the environmental NGOs working on the ground thus making change effortless yet impactful.

At the same time this creates a sense of gifting of the network link adjoining their personal networks to create a system of mass participation. This network is similar to that of the direct action movements of the 1960's where participation was created by forms of media that linked people at the point where there personal contribution, as minimal as it may be, was a part of a larger network that would fund and call attention upon a common value. Both this sort of movement and the work of Baffico revisit the dialogue of value, community and action.

*Stands up*. "Hi, my name is Curtis and I'm a dreamer." "HI CURTIS!"

This is a little snippet about my life path, a shameless plug if you will about me getting myself off my own butt and "doing" something about my love of places. Last year, I touched foot on my 30th country and 5th continent. I should have been beyond thrilled to check off another place on my to-do-in-life-list, especially since Australia is so magical. I wasn't. Ever felt like you have every reason on earth to be happy about something but feel something really important is just missing? For me, carbon offsets, financial and volunteer contributions, treading lightly/leaving no trace, and endless talk about how much I love travel and places no longer quenched my soul. I wanted to do more. I needed to do more. I even felt obligated to my unborn children and all those who will come after I'm long gone. I know I'm not alone in my legacy thinking.

A handful of years ago, I found myself in a conversation with an older man at the beach. The topic was an easy one as the shores surrounding us were littered with those scary orange signs that read "DANGER. CONTAMINATED WATER KEEP OUT." As a surfer, this breaks my heart. I must have expressed some sort of pessimism for this man to tell me a story that years later really inspired me to chase a dream. Maybe you've heard it before:

One early morning a man was walking towards the beach. Off in the distance he could see someone going back and forth between the surf's edge and the dry sand.

As he got closer, he saw a young man collecting starfish and throwing them back into the sea. The man looked down the long stretch of white sand and saw that stranded starfish scattered the shore for as far as the eye could see.

He approached the young man and asked "What are you doing?"

The young man paused, looked up and replied, "Throwing these starfish back in the ocean."

"I guess I should have asked why are you throwing these starfish into the ocean?"

The young man replied, "The sun is coming up and the tide is going out. If I don't throw them back they'll die."

"But there are far too many starfish than you can ever save before the sun is up. Surely you can't expect to make a difference."

The young man bent down, picked up another starfish and threw it into the sea and said, "I made a difference to that one."

This simple story reignited my belief that little actions can truly add up to make a big difference, even if they don't actually solve the entire problem. I was inspired to take what I'm hoping will be a permanent leave of absence from the corporate rat race to finally pursue my dream of creating a lasting, people-powered revenue source for our planet's caretakers; the organizations fighting on the front-lines to protect and preserve the beauty we all claim we love. Personally, I can't imagine not giving back (or paying it forward) for being so fortunate to see such amazing, far-off places and vibrant cultures beyond my wildest dreams. I guess you could say I'm determined to leave the planet in better condition than I found it.

My idea is One Buck for the Planet (.org). It's the first and only green social networking website of its kind that provides individuals and businesses the opportunity to grow an endless ripple of giving for our planet's top caretakers.

It's simple. It's ridiculously cheap (US$1). And it's a fun and innovative way to give back to the planet in a way found nowhere else. It's also a super cool way to show your greenness in whole new light. My favorite part is that you can watch your ripple (a.k.a. your personal giving network) grow, and see (and take ownership in) the difference you create---one buck at a time, one person at a time.

Behind the scenes? To capture every level of giving by you and the people in your ripple (and the people in their ripple, and beyond), we've built special Multi-Level Giving Software. It tracks and reports each new person in your ripple, allowing you to watch the positive difference you and your giving network create. There are no limits to how big your ripple can grow or how many dollars it can raise for the planet. Telling just one person can literally create an endless ripple with the potential to reach millions globally. It's not rocket science, just the law of viral marketing and the feel-good-factor working hand in hand. And, it's 100% people-powered.

Whether you love the oceans, wildlife, nature, or want to fight global warming, One Buck for the Planet cultivates real dollars for a handpicked group of environmental movers and shakers, all with proven track records of getting things done. Each believes in tackling problems at the roots, because that's how long term changes are made. Creating a lasting difference and lessening my footprint on the environment is what drives me and the One Buck concept.

So, is there a power of ONE - despite the seemingly small and insignificant impact? I wholeheartedly answer "yes," and challenge all who say they care to please take this one simple action---or another environmentally helpful one that feels right to you.

Architecture has come a long way in the past thirty to forty years, building on established ideas of space, form, function, and use in order to reflect upon and adapt to the ever changing values of contemporary society. As a result of these reflections many established concepts and previously uncontested "truths" of architecture are also being brought under an increasing amount of scrutiny as our understanding of the systems within which we exist become more complex.

Rather than being static forms dislocated from their surrounding environments buildings are becoming more and more integrated with their environments in a multitude of ways that range from social concerns for local community and users to environmental responsiveness. Examples of this can be seen in firms such as Morphosis who include a buildings intended users and their surrounding community as an integral part of the design process, and Thomas Herzog of Herzog + Partner, who has been exploring and developing ways for buildings to become environmentally responsive and energy independent since the seventies. Other groups like MVRDV, with their Mirador project in Spain and their New Orleans L9W Project, have been rethinking the way that affordable family housing is organized and formed within an urban context . When compared to more iconographic notions of architecture, such as those presented by Frank Lloyd Wright, or Frank Gehry, it becomes very evident that this new way of thinking is not just about the future of architecture but about the future of humanity itself and how we will continue to live and exist as a self conscious social entity that is aware of and responsive to our surroundings.

With this in mind it is my contention that architecture will continue to concern itself with matters that go beyond the design of individual buildings as it dives into matters of overall community and urban development by working hand in hand with city planners, emerging technology, local ecology, and community residents every step of the way. The architecture that emerges as a result of this kind of holistic approach to design is an architecture that is beautiful not because it stands defiantly apart from the world, but because it has chosen to integrate itself with the world. It exists as a design practice that is irrevocably tied to its environment, fostering a deep sense of stewardship and connection for that environment by furthering our practical understanding of local ecology.

Through this integrated approach of architecture and city planning and environmental stewardship we can and will begin to see municipalities who value efficient public transit, and a sense of proximity that is conducive to cycling and walking, as well as the growing desire for cities to become more energy self sufficient. As a result I predict that the future will hold substantially less unorganized urban sprawl, less dependency on private automobiles (which are inefficient and extremely expensive), a greater understanding of urban ecology and more focus on what we are capable of doing for the future rather than on what the past has done for us.

Today there are a multitude of incredibly far reaching and exciting projects under way. The most ambitious of them being the Office of Metropolitan Architecture's to build a 1.5 million person community in the United Arab Emirates, called Waterfront City. The proposed city will be situated in between Abu Dhabi and Dubai, an area of the UAE well known for its ceaseless urban development in spite of limited environmental resources. Most of the funding for these desert mega cities comes from the elevated prices of oil, but how will these cities continue to fund themselves and grow in the future if they are not able to rely on their oil reserves? How does it justify the environmental impact and disruption of offshore ecology that results from the creation of massive man made harbors and islands? And most importantly how do these cities intend to responsibly and independently sustain themselves in the future? These are just some of the questions that I would have loved to asked the Office of Metropolitan Architecture while writing this, unfortunately they remain unavailable for an interview. As disappointing as this may be, it does not make these questions any less important and it certainly does not stop us from asking them, so please join me in asking not only our city councils, and designers, but also each other; how we intend to secure an environmentally responsible future.

// Feedback
The notion of "purpose" in algorithmic machines can be traced back to the early texts of cybernetics, and specifically to the seminal 1943 paper "Behavior, Purpose, Teleology" {1} in which Rosenblueth, Wiener and Bigelow use the term "purpose" to describe a temporal process known as "negative feedback" within which an organism or machine is capable of adjusting its behavior in relation to a material "goal". By observing the behavior of the entity relationally, we can track its ability to change itself and determine whether its behavior is purposeful or purposeless in relation to that goal. As examples of random or purposeless machines, they cite a roulette wheel, or a clock, which  while seeking a certain outcome by design (a number or time)  have no specific behavioral relationship to these material goals: they do not readjust themselves in relation to their goal, and are therefore closed systems. Similarly, a gun can be designed to seek a certain target, but can also be used entirely without relation to any specified target,  la Andr Breton for whom the simplest surrealist act was to walk down the street, revolver in hand, shooting randomly into the crowd {2}. On the side of purposeful behavior, the authors cite the torpedo and the cat, two very un-surrealist entities that are capable of aligning themselves behaviorally with their targets  be it a ship or a mouse  and endlessly adjust their internal states in relationship to these material (or external) goals.

// Temporal Circularity
The words "purpose", "goal", and "teleology" are to be understood here as circular structures that define behavior actively, despite our western eschatological tendencies to see these processes as mere "ends", and thereby annul the actual activity itself. By placing an essential ingredient of internal activity outside of that activity's core, an open relationship is defined that can no longer consider finality as an "end". So while a bullet, a torpedo, and a cat all seek out certain "ends", it is only the latter two  the torpedo and the cat  that would do so purposefully as "voluntary activity" {3}. Another way of stating this principle, and avoiding the somewhat metaphysical attribute "voluntary", would be to say that the torpedo and the cat both react to and interact with their environment proactively, and by doing so define their behavior as profoundly "purposeful". The purpose of their behavior is to maintain a specific relationship with their environment, and to be able to adapt themselves as that environment evolves. This maintenance in relation to their environment is in fact a form of dynamic modeling, and in a certain sense could be considered a construction of the environment itself. The "goal" therefore acts as the "model"  our present-day "algorithm"  that animates the machine or organism from within, in relation to environmental factors. As such, it is a temporal circularity that acts in strict contradistinction with the metaphysical notions of "finality" or "end" {4}.

// Standing-reserve
While we're on the subject of metaphysics, this is perhaps a good time to compare this temporally circular cybernetic structure with Martin Heidegger's surprisingly ecological assessment of modern technology as mere "Bestand"  i.e. as an "idling" or "standing-reserve" {5}. For Heidegger, the shift from classical technology to modern technology is a temporal one, and therefore a shift in relation to Being. He characterizes this temporal shift as a move towards technological configurations that transform existence into supply and availability. Nature, technological objects, and humanity itself are made available as mere supplies to be placed at the disposal of a larger technological process. The plane sitting on the runway awaiting take-off, the power-station on the Rhine converting momentum into electricity, these are mere temporal collectors for Heidegger. The machine is collecting time within itself in submission to its future purpose within the technological configuration, the Ge-stell, or what in French translates easily enough as the "dispositif" (think "disposition"). Technology is this temporal mode of Being which for Heidegger progressively encroaches on the domain of Being's poitic qualities and the coming-into-being of phenomena, which he names truth or "altheia" {6}.

// Pre + Gramma
While Heidegger admirably avoids the rhetoric of both the technophile and the technophobe ("a stultified compulsion to push on blindly with technology or, what comes to the same thing, to rebel helplessly against it and curse it as the work of the devil" {7}), he nevertheless coalesces a certain number of misconceptions about technology, notably those concerning their temporal structure. We use Heidegger here as a counter-example precisely because he quite correctly saw technology not as a collection of mechanical devices, but in fact as a temporality. It is our firm belief that in order to understand machines of any sort, we need to observe them within their temporal incarnations. But when it comes to algorithmic, programmable, or any other form of modular machines  machines that for the most part were just barely eking out an existence at the time of his argument , the Heideggerian paradigm starts to break down and gives us only the most approximate understanding of their ontology. So why then use Heidegger's temporal model at all? Because it is an extremely prescient model for one of the most common misunderstandings concerning this temporal nature of algorithmic machines, and by extension of all machines: namely, their "pre-programmed" nature, or the manner in which they are mere collections of preconceived forms  mere reflex , and therefore have no open-ended qualities outside of the standing-reserve, idling in neutral as they await the next impulse. For Heidegger, technology short-circuits the emergent principles of altheia, and replaces it with an instrumentalization of time that annuls futurity by merely awaiting an event that has already been calculated in advance. Let us call this this conception of machines the "pre-gramma" model: technology as pre-conditioning the future, already written out "in advance of" the event.

// Pro + Gramma
In place of this model, let us explore the idea of a "pro" grammatic machine as a machine that "opens onto" a future possibility  a "future-oriented" machine, oriented "in the direction of" the future. Where "pre-" suggests temporal precedence, "pro-" instead suggests temporal orientation, and even preference. This is an intentional confusion of the Latin and Greek meanings of "pro-", an ambiguity that we are exploiting to simply highlight the way in which technological "disposition" can be considered either as a form of precedence, or as an acting "on behalf of" a future event, oriented towards it in the same way as the torpedo adjusts itself to its future target. Only here, the pro-grammatic nature of the variable machine opens up an orientation or availability onto the future itself. This is the constructive nature of temporal circularity: it builds bridges that cast out temporally into the sea of futurity. No matter their preexistent nature, without interaction emanating from within the future, this technological predisposition is meaningless. This is the fundamental difference of the Heideggerian temporality of "standing-reserve" at work within the technological "Ge-stell" and the cybernetic temporality of "purpose" at work within variable (i.e. constructive) behavioral relationships to an "environment". There is something so true about the standing-reserve: machines do indeed await interaction. But the temporal nature of this interaction once instigated  the way in which the machine actualizes itself through use and fleshes out its internal diagram within a specific context , transforms the object into a future-oriented machine. The degree to which the machine reconstitutes itself in relation to future actions determines precisely the degree to which we can claim this machine is open. This openness is either by design or by default, or perhaps both, and probably at work in all machines, for they all contain some degree of indetermination, akin to the Derridean concept of "play" {9}. Without play, they would be unusable as machines. This question of openness however is more a question of degree than of essence. Or perhaps better put, it is a question of degree that determines the essence of the device as either open-ended (temporal circularity) or pure reflex ("Bestand" or "standing-reserve") and all the nuances in between.

// The Turing Machine
At the core of every contemporary algorithmic machine sits a feedback machine. But sitting next to that core, lies yet another, second core: the abstraction machine. The birth of this abstraction machine extends far beyond the invention of the computer, but converges in full view at right about 1936 and the publication of Alan Turing's  "On Computable Numbers, With an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem" {10}. In this historically significant text, Turing proposes the "Universal Machine", a machine capable of calculating an arbitrary series of instructions and which through various twists and turns would more or less become the blueprint for what today we call the computer. If feedback introduced the concept of temporal circularity and what is today often called "interactivity", the Turing Machine would have to be the introduction of temporal indeterminacy and the endless cycle of "repurposing" proper to all algorithmic machines. But oddly enough, this temporal indeterminacy grows out of a strict adherence to a very peculiar form of linearity. One of the stranger designs of Turing's machine is its iterative execution strand : in a Turing machine, an infinite ribbon contains a series of discrete instructions that are acted upon by a single moving read/write manipulation head, or cursor; while the initial states of the instructions can be placed in advance upon the ribbon, one can only know the final state of the instructions after the cursor has run through each instruction one at a time and modified it. While we are free to record the original state of the machine and the resulting state after it has run through its algorithm, all of the intermediary states that lead us from one to the other cannot be proven until each step has been acted upon. In other words, there is no temporally transcendent perspective that would allow us to understand the "proof" of the algorithm without actually taking all the steps into account and running them through the machine. It is precisely at this point that the Turing Machine shifts from being a problem of resolving computability, and transforms itself into the blueprint for contemporary modular machines: by creating a series of linear steps that are entirely contingent on one another temporally, it becomes possible to construct a potentially infinite number of machines within the Turing Machine by simply adjusting the state of each individual (future) step. If the machine does not entirely know what it must do at step X, Y or Z until it actually gets there, there is nothing stopping us from transforming the states (and therefore the "role" or the "purpose") of these steps before the machine actually arrives. The only constraint  and a significant one  becomes the requirement to respect the protocol of what the machine considers valid (or "legal") instructions in order to function. Within this un-benign limitation, however, an infinite number of algorithmic structures can be constructed, including non-linear algorithmic structures that simulate massive parallelism such as our "multitasking" computers of today. The Turing Machine frees up machines from ontological determinism, and yet does so within an entirely determined (i.e. purposeful) design.

// Variability and Modularity
Returning to the temporally circular cybernetic organism or machine, there is an uncanny similarity in which the diagrams of both machines depend on an ontological indeterminacy that would eventually prove compatible with one another: our modern-day machines are both reactive and re-programmable, all in real-time while the machine runs through its various states. But while these two qualities  circularity and indeterminacy  resemble one another, especially in their relationship to futurity, they ultimately suggest two different scales of change. In computers, this difference is immediately palpable: our machines are capable of locally adjusting their behavior to both internal and external changes (micro-adaptation), but they are also capable of changing the entire genre of their behavior and to break off into new realms of activity (macro-adaptation). Our machines are both variable and modular, which might sound oddly synonymous but in fact suggests two very different scales of change on the part of the machine. A variable machine works within its algorithm in order to adjust itself to whatever it is dealing with; while a modular machine modifies the manner in which just such an algorithm works. Interestingly, these two degrees of variation can feed into one another, for example in neural networks or genetic algorithms, but also in popular forms of computing such as video games that adjust themselves to the movements of the players and introduce new obstacles and attractions depending on the dynamics of the play. But while these two terms co-exist on two very different scales ontologically, at the lowest material strata of the machine the two phenomena are practically indistinguishable. In fact, the modern computer solved the problem of how to adapt its behavior by juggling with its indeterminacy. All algorithms are required to run through the step-by-step process of execution within the machine, and any change in behavior  for example changing the trajectory of the torpedo in order to align it with its target  requires changing the specific part of the computer code that is fed into the machine while it runs. Almost any significant program contains within itself any number of bifurcating sub-programs that modulate its reaction to any given environment. In other words, the modular nature of the machine (i.e. the possibility of feeding it entirely new programs) is the key to maintaining its reactivity. Micro-adjustments use the same technique as macro-adjustments; variables and routines are behaviorally two very different entities, but inside the modern computer they are controlled by the same mechanism: instructions are data, just like everything else. So while variation and modularity can be seen as two genealogically distinct contributions  the first inherited from cybernetics, the second from theoretical mathematics , the two contributions tend to merge at the computational level into a single model of the modular machine endlessly repurposing itself. It is the Turing Machine that makes possible the cybernetic machine. It is the abstraction machine that makes possible "real-time" variability. But both can be considered a larger machinic form of adaptation.

// Dtournement
As Heidegger suggests, there is a certain "danger" {11} to our argument. And perhaps we have just taken the wind out of many an artist's sails by suggesting that the fundamental nature of the machine is to remodel itself into an infinite series of new forms. With terms such as "dtournement" all the rage for many idealistic young artists, it might drop like a total bummer to learn that the machine is already designed as a sort of endless re-purposing machine. For in any discussion of art practice as "re-purposing", there is most probably a certain desire to define digital art-making as the next form of "dtournement" and therefore uniquely in-step or ahead of the curve of the society from which it emerges. And yet as we have argued here, the machine is already a re-purposing machine, as the computer industry has long since understood. This should give pause to anyone trying to suggest that by merely redefining the purpose of the machine they have somehow redefined its social impact. Such a definition of "dtournement", which lacks the essential critical component, should most certainly be considered instead mere "retournement", i.e. the purely automated upheaval of inherited social codes and behaviors.

// Techn
But how can an artist take such a position, especially in light of the enormous weight of industry pushing down on the art world, with many direct affronts to the autonomy of artists via software and hardware, increasingly sold as if they represented nothing less than the Muses themselves? Even worse, digital art is often defended institutionally with what would seem the contrary to this argument, namely that the role of the artist is not to design the packaging of the machine, nor to merely work within its constraints, but instead to redesign its purpose and to give it a more transcendent signification. By suggesting that the modularity of the machine predestines it to a form of endless re-purposing, aren't we dangerously close to suggesting that technology itself has supplanted the creative process, and automated the generative processes of human inspiration? Indeed, both Heidegger in his lyrical conclusion to "The Question Concerning Technology" {12}, and Deleuze and Guattari in their 1991 work "What is Philosophy ?" {13}, railed against the suggestion that technology somehow had gained access to the creative force of thought (for Deleuze and Guattari) and even becoming itself (for Heidegger):

The most shameful moment came when computer science, marketing, design, and advertising, all the disciplines of communication, seized hold of the word concept itself and said: "This is our concern, we are the creative ones, we are the ideas men! We are the friends of the concept, we put it in our computers."" - Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, "What is Philosophy?", p.10
In fact, Deleuze, Guattari and Heidegger all placed unlimited wealth in the activity of the artist as a direct affront to the forces of technology and its industry. For Deleuze and Guattari, artists are the unique locus of the creation of "percepts", in absolute distinction with the pseudo-generative commercial purveyors of creativity, who appear more concerned with communication than art. Whereas for Heidegger artists maintain a privileged relation to technology via their historical connection to artistic process as "techn" {14}. Indeed, Heidegger saw artists as in fact the ideal response to the impasse of technology's ever-expanding reach:

Because the essence of technology is nothing technological, essential reflection upon technology and decisive confrontation with it must happen in a realm that is, on the one hand, akin to the essence of technology and, on the other, fundamentally different from it. Such a realm is art." - Martin Heidegger, "The Question Concerning Technology", p.35
// Achilles Heel
One response to these concerns is to suggest that the unworking of technology is already at work in the technology itself. And perhaps it is indeed the privileged role of the artist to observe these internal defects, to exploit them, and thereby reveal something from within its contradictions, rather than trying to play the machine better than it at its own game. We call this disjunctive space the "achilles heel" of technology, as the internal limit of the machine built inside of it from the moment of its inception {15}. In the myth of Achilles, Thetis (his mother) sought to render her son invulnerable by dipping him into the river that separated the underworld from the world of the living, the river Styx. But while covering Achilles with his new armament Thetis made one mistake, and that was to leave uncovered one small fraction of his body: the heel she used to hold him as she lowered him in. It was this one unprotected space that would eventually lead to his downfall. In other words, the technological gesture that gifted Achilles with his singular strength, was the very same gesture that opened him up to his ruin.

// Physicalization
There are many internal contradictions in any technology, especially media technologies {16}. But in computer technologies, it is our position that the most powerful achilles heel of the machine is space. Briefly stated, in order make abstract thinking mechanical, cybernetics and the Turing Machine had to transform thinking into a spatialization machine. By making physical circuits that could enact a rational thought-process iteratively, the physicalization of abstractions was made possible. But this simultaneously sealed the fate of the machine as intimately tied with the space that that same abstraction would have to occupy in order to function. This is the process of physicalization, whereby the more the machine desires abstraction and dematerialization, the more it has to occupy physical space {17}. It is important to insist that this is not necessarily a negative phenomena, but rather merely part of the design of the machine itself. In a discussion of "purpose", and "repurposing", the physicalization at work in all aspects of information technology in fact takes on a profoundly positive character, and suggests that the role of the artist is not necessarily the dismantling of the machine, nor the slavish rebuilding of the machine, but instead the construction of the social and material inscription of the machine, i.e. the manner in which it is physicalized aesthetically. It is from this perspective that we can talk about the "purpose  of the machine without being tied to any nave belief in transcending the machine in order to reach new transformative social use, nor in accepting the machine as a necessary evil for progressing human activity. Physicalization instead suggests that the machine is in itself a modular entity that can inhabit many forms of adaptation. The central issue therefore revolves not around the mere fact that machine can be re-tooled, or re-purposed, but in fact the actual manner in which we physicalize the purpose of the machine.
If nature in late capitalism is the spectacle and the commodities that are in circulation than mimesis of the spectacle is the natural starting point.
-G.H. Hovagimyan, "Re-Staging, Re-Enactment, Remix and Mimetics"
The scene on the online player window is a pleasant and bright Summer afternoon. Dozens of American Flags wave gallantly to the right under steerage from a light breeze on the Washington DC mall. A young man reads at a small podium and microphone upon a stage. His unstyled medium length brown hair and crudely worn light blue Oxford shirt and jeans are ruffled by the wind and belie his eloquence and sophisticated message. The small crowd is filled with spectators in casual attire as well as those who seem to be in route to business meetings or church. Cameramen are occasionally caught in the video frame taking shots of the crowd and speaker. They all stand on the grass and listen while occasionally peppering the young man's message with applause:

"Most of us grew up thinking that the United States was a strong but humble nation, that involved itself in world affairs only reluctantly, that respected the integrity of other nations and other systems, and that engaged in wars only as a last resort. This was a nation with no large standing army, with no design for external conquest, that sought primarily the opportunity to develop its own resources and its own mode of living. If at some point we began to hear vague and disturbing things about what this country had done in Latin America, China, Spain and other places, we somehow remained confident about the basic integrity of this nation's foreign policy. The Cold War with all of its neat categories and black and white descriptions did much to assure us that what we had been taught to believe was true."1
The crowd continues to grow larger with pedestrians, exercise fanatics, and tourists. They are drawn in by his unassuming air and passion:

The President says that we are defending freedom in Vietnam. Whose freedom? Not the freedom of the Vietnamese. The first act of the first dictator, Diem, the United States installed in Vietnam, was to systematically begin the persecution of all political opposition, non-Commumist as well as Communist. The first American military supplies were not used to fight Communist insurgents; they were used to control, imprison or kill any who sought something better for Vietnam than the personal aggrandizement, political corruption and the profiteering of the Diem regime."2
As the speech continues, it becomes abundantly obvious that this speech written for another war from another era. Instinctually and observationally, the evidence in the quality of  image and audio, the participant-audience's clothing, and the brief glimpses of the technical equipment tell that this video was produced within this decade. Uncannily, the words are profoundly appropriate for the contemporary conflict with which the United States currently wrestles. The text begs for the an exercise in nomenclature replacement to supplant "Diem" with "Hussein" and "Communist" with "Islamic Fundamentalist".

This speech, "We Must Name the System", was authored by Paul Potter of the Students for a Democratic Society and was originally delivered on April 17, 1965 to 25000 Vietnam War protesters. This reenactment is part of a larger project from a group of political activists and artists at Brown University, the Port Huron Project led by Mark Tribe. Tribe has organized three of these reenactments to date, one originally delivered by Howard Zinn and the other by Coretta Scott King. The speeches are re-created on the original historic public sites encouraging the participation by those who might pass through the event. These open re-creations may seem superficially as ironic or wry demonstrations on the contemporary hegemony but, in fact lie within a field of historic re-creationism and reenactment as aesthetic practice. The Reenactment as Performance Art has gained a sense of presence and power beyond mimesis and simple satire. This momentum deserves inspection to suss out the cultural function of this historical mimesis.

When contemporary discussions turn toward history, the admonition 'those who don't remember are doomed to repeat it' looms. This warning is exasperated by the flattening of time through instantaneous global communication. The analysis of the externalization of memory through the network and how it fosters the death of history or how it simply unties the human mind from memory seems too shallow to explain the power of the reenactment praxis. Reenactment can be a meaningful point of re-authorship in a culture beset by the flattening of time and the politics of history.

The conservative function of the history discipline is to develop understanding of the lineage of events and ideas and their hegemonies. The narratives and contexts, at best, are interpretive; they are dissolved, shifted by time, and skewed by the politic of the archive in which they are inscribed. This is the second admonition: "history is written by the victor". Contemporary context cannot help but invade the present reading of an already interpretive impression and precludes an impartial record.

Reenactment participants often refer to the uncanny sensation of the "real and unreal" while re-creating.  The reenactor automatically engages a conceptual negotiation of a dual context. This duplicitous context is formed in the interpretation of the historic event and how its' meaning has changed over the course of time. Additionally, this engagement is genesis to a form of agency, where the recreated act creates a conduit to transaction. This path evolves from the re-creationist act in which a historic setting, time, and hegemony try to simultaneously displace the present and create a new conceptual site. The reenactment cannot entirely replace the present; a competition evolves between the two. Reenactment is thus sited at an interstices of past and present.

The surreality of this site arises from competition of the politics of history and present. The actor mimetically engages in the contingencies of the reproduced duration at the same time moments in the present pass. Rather than instilling a sense of detachment and independent observation, reenactments collapse the historical-present relationship imbuing agency in and of both times and the necessity to transact in both economies. Somatically, the reenactment functions as an autonomic historiography.

In the project Revolutionary Days, Portland based artist collective, Red76  doesn't simply reproduce the presence of revolutionary historic figures Ginsberg and Trotsky as much as they escorted the spirit into contemporary Philadelphia and also it's historic narrative.



"I myself chose to be Allen Ginsberg that day. I didn't look much different, except for the fact that I did a lot of chanting. So I suppose I acted a bit different. I bought a dove from a market off of South St. and released it in front of Independence Hall. My friend Adam was Leon Trotsky. He wore small wire framed glass and a burly red coat. Zefrey was Ian Mackaye from the band Fugzai, among others. Zefrey didn't look too much different than he normal does, though he kind of looks like Mackaye anyhow. We all broke in and out of character. Talked about our lives as Beat Hippy Avitars and Red Army commanders. We ate breakfast. Trotsky and Mackaye discussed the finer points of the early eighties Washington D.C. Hardcore scene. Did we stand out from the crowd? If so, why?"3


Leon Trotsky on the streets of Philaadelphia, PA circa 2007.
Leon Trotsky on the streets of Philaadelphia, PA circa 2007.
The project illustrates that reenactment can dissolve the geographic link to site specificity in exchange for the performance space of the body. The body of the reenactor becomes the aforementioned interstices of past/present. For Kristine Stiles the site for performance is the performer; collapsing the separations between art object and author into a sign and signified of art-author "...whom viewers see as both the subject and object of the work...".4  Thus, reenactment is a subset of Performance Art where separations between subject (past) and object (present) become confused.
All reproductions do not function this way. Simulation, repetition, and reproduction can all occur without a meaningful negotiation of both temporal politics (Blackson, 2007)5. Recordings do reproduce aspects of the events but, in the separation of author from object, the simulacrum loses the authority that reenactment expresses. It is dubious to claim that a recording of the symphony replaces the performance or viewers presence. The aesthetic politics of documentation further complicate the historic through implicit aesthetic. Bernadette Sweeney has written about the inadequacies of the document:



"In this way of thinking, visual documentation, whether it is video or photography, brings with it an ideology and an aesthetic which prevent it from functioning simply as evidence. Every photo you see here was taken by a particular viewer, at a moment they chose, and framed and printed the way they thought best. Each photo and video therefore has its own aesthetic values, and its own purpose. They interfere, like static, with the perception of the performance itself... The visual becomes suspect: it is no longer evidential, but contentious." 6


The document occludes the event and reinforces a politics in aesthetic and narrative in the same manner historic narrative draws around events. Perhaps, one could surmise that if enough technological savvy were brought to bear a recording could simulate the experience to the senses but, the fact that the timeline can be manipulated at the whim of the audience such as TiVO, paused and rewound again and again, unhinges the duration of reenactment's site and presence of object/subject jumble. The document fails achieve the mimetic nature or site of reenactment.

The political frame that is drawn is powerful, influential, and contentious. In 1970, the United American Indians of New England (UAINE) declared Thanksgiving as a Day of Morning. That year, participation of Wampanoag leader Frank B. Wamsutta, was cut from the 350th commemoration program when it was discovered that he was going represent the perspectives of the Native Americans at the time of the first Thanksgiving. Like a photographic document, the contention created by the alternate narrative frame has resulted in a yearly protest and boycott of the Plymouth reenactment by Native American groups since 1970. Thanksgiving holds a sacred place in the origin myth of Plymouth and the nation and thus the hegemony has refused to allow participation in the officially recognized reenactment . Subversively, this marginalization of the protesters continues and highlights the history of marginalization of native Americans.

Reenactment as a impressively motive as well as threatening force can cut the other way as well; Blackson recounts the story of a Lewis and Clark reenactment that has been blocked many times by Native Americans:



"To honor the bicentennial of the Lewis and Clark expedition, a group of reenactors named Discovery Expedition, led by Peyton "Bud" Clark (the great-great-great-grandson of William Clark),  is retracing the historic journey. However, they have been stopped numerous times by Native American tribes. These tribes claim that the reenactment is disrespectful to the plight of Native Americans struggling to reclaim their land rights. The Lewis and Clark reenactors brought with them a Tomahawk Peace Pipe in hopes that the tribes might smoke it with the reenactors and call a truce from their protesting. The Native Americans refused.'8


Complicity in the reenactment of manifest destiny would reinforce a less than whole history (i.e the contentious document) surrounding the 'discovery' and subsequent colonization of the American continent.

Smithson's Site/Non-Site strategy reinforced the Spectacle and the culture of infinite reproduction. If the document is contentious, how are we to negotiate the fluvial culture of the network without simply engaging in reproductions of the contentious . G.H. Hovagimyan addresses this flattening with: "A recent bit of oral whit , a meme if you will has been making the round of the information class. People are saying, "There is no there, there." I would extend that to say, "There is no now, now."9

And yet he fails to consider time that reenactment performance demands. The site of aesthetic reenactment is the body or the site of the actor's embodiment but is equally dependent on Bergson's notion of Duration in that the reenactor must weave their way through the contests between Contemporary and History during the performance.

Realtime strategy, particularly medieval based, games such as Koei and The Chronicles of the Three Kingdoms have leveraged historic reenactment to build narrative into the platform. These two games focus on China's historic saga of Three Kingdoms, a highly romanticized but relatively short period, approximately 75 years, was a tumultuous epoch of war for the heirship to Emperor. Some estimates set the number of lives that were lost at 40 million.  These ramifications of these event have been influential on many cultures in Asia and spawned many Chinese heroes and mythic warriors.

This influence can be seen in how, Warcraft III has been used to recreate historic battles of the Three Kingdoms saga by a group of enthusiasts in China.10 The Warcraft platform is a highly romanticized medieval-esque fiction; version III of the game incorporated tools to sculpt the landscape, numbers of factions, the number and type of warriors in each faction, etc. The players inserted the names and characteristics of the heroes of the Three Kingdoms period onto the game heroes for the reenactment and sculpted historically accurate populations and geography. This intervention allowed for a synthesis of game tools and historical narrative displacing the game engine and folding in of historic factions, time spans, narratives, etc. into the synthetic world of the game. The players can reenact and engage in the duration of realtime decision making and strategy. It also allows the reenactors to adjust to the reinterpretations of the history as they change.

SCA Arab Intervention (2004). Eddo Stern. Digital photograph. 20"x15".
SCA Arab Intervention (2004). Eddo Stern. Digital photograph. 20"x15".
Insertion of the historiographer-artist into a context of a highly specific reenactment community can yield powerful political statements with a further layering. In "SCA Arab Intervention (2004)."11, Eddo Stern inserted himself into the Society of Creative Anachronisms (SCA); a gallimaufry of politics of past and present. In a field filled with a riot of individuals in medieval regalia and armor caught up in melee; tension is created from a lone individual standing in the foreground in a Shimagh - a traditional Arabic head scarf. He stands in stark contrast to the combatants who are easily identified as European warriors by the conical steel helmets and embattled tabards.12

One of the defining features of the SCA is the live contact engagement by the warrior class.  In this engagement, the weapons are couched by the negotiation of the present, trading steel for rattan and foam. Live contact necessitates actual armor to be fabricated, often, with period proper materials. A deep social pressure exists amongst members to apply "period" appropriate methods and materials in all aspects of society participation encouraging the members to achieve historically accurate clothing, food ingredients and preparation methods, etc despite the complications and "distractions" of the contemporary. Obtaining a high degree of authenticity is rewarded with societal sanctification creates a highly competitive and continuous re-reading of period histories by the members to earn these honors and privileges. When Stern yells in Arabic over a megaphone at the European war reenactment, he calls into question the inadequacies of these highly polished  historical readings/experiences. A re-reading of the history of and current conflicts between Europe and the Mid-East manifest immediately from his intervention.

The attempt to mimetically displace the politics of today with those called historic forces a reconsideration if not analytical site to form in the competition. It appears that even mythic or less than whole narratives can somehow engage in a better understanding of culture and the inescapable politics.

Eye Beam Resident Artists Graffiti Research Lab (GRL) visited San Jose State University recently, with their anarchy-lined message of future-hope through open source code.  The aspirations of Graffiti Research Lab attempt to combat the proliferation of corporate media and advertisements across the urban landscape, and promote social change. They do this through advancing Graffiti technologies and by providing a forum for everyone to make use of such technologies through open source. The founders of GRL, James Powderly and Evan Roth, go as far as signing an agreement which bans either of them from benefiting monetarily from these technologies created in their lab.

Their works consist of technologies that enhance the ability to highlight the effect of graffiti art, often through complex arrangements of LEDs and software. Their most successful piece was a based around a technology called Laser T.A.G. which enables writers to display their graffiti projected across buildings using a powerful laser and projector. Graffiti serves as the ideal medium to combat mass advertisements of consumerism, because it generally shares and competes for space on the urban landscape. The unlawful nature of graffiti art allows it to serve as an amazing tool to capture the very oppositional nature of subverted countercultures, being a subversive itself.

The problem is that GRLs use of open source as a forum for distributing these powerful technologies is that they are often undermined. The complexities of code are often inaccessible to those most able to benefit from these tools, while accessible to seemingly nefarious corporations willingly take these technologies and use them as tools for advertising and commerce. But most importantly, the obtuse language used to define digital technology creates an environment impossible to control these new mediums. As result, projects like LED throwies, which were initially made to challenge advertising space, were subverted by advertising companies and to be used as forms of commercial promotion for the likes of Coke and Turner Broadcasting. This is a great concern because the work and ideals of GRL seems to be negated by these issues.
Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie advertising campaign run amuck.
Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie advertising campaign run amuck.

Creative Commons (CC) Licenses should be a simple and effective way to address GRLs issues of the malign copying of their product by corporations; as such licenses can serve to filter to allow for some to make use of their product, and others, such as corporations from not using their product. CC licenses seem to be working so far for websites like Wikipedia, but CC licenses are very limiting in that they follow the archaic models of laws and languages that seem to be plaguing contemporary distribution of media.

Currently there are many legal challenges to this outdated system, such as the case against Jamie Thomas, a single mother of two was found liable of copyright infringement in the nations first file-sharing case to go before a jury. The Writers Guild of America are currently on strike over wages concerning their intellectual property being distributed over the internet and the British rock band Radiohead released their latest album  In Rainbows, to the public for a donation fee of ones choosing. These examples not only represent a tide of change concerning the role digital media as a commodity but for the archaic modes for the current structure of laws that serve to organize the use of digital properties.

These current events of confusion concerning digital ownership can be ascribed as the result of this current age of digitalization. The World Wide Web has increased the accessibility of this so-defined "intellectual property". Most of these products are property owned by individuals or companies that given the accessibility of reproducing digital have found it impossible to prevent the fast illegal reproduction of digital material. This is further worsened by archaic laws and language that serve to control and define these new commodities.

This new digital age of reproduction is a throwback to the introduction of the printing press in 1430, which allowed for the mass production of images to free images and art from wealthy ultimately, altering the aura and power of the image.  The current rapid growth of the digitalization of information is further changing the role of more complex media within our society. Now that such media are able to be copied and reproduced, it is important to discuss the changing role of the artist in society with regards to the reproducibility of these digital mediums especially concerning the recent controversies with the reproduction and redistribution of digital content.

Let us consider the difference between watching a celluloid film and a digitalized version of the same film. The celluloid film is traditionally projected into a large darkened room, and there is little room for interpretation regarding the focus of reality created through such exhibition practices. With this, is hundred year old traditions of exhibition and group ritual practices that have become engrained in Americana are altered. Once that image is digitalized, as has become the practice for DVD and iPod distribution, the version of the same film is no longer bound to this particular viewing environment. It can be played via an iPod while on a train, or in class on a laptop. Through the same means of distribution, free albeit pirated software is readily available for quickly reediting or manipulating these mediums. And most importantly they can be copied and downloaded, and often times distributed before the film is theatrically released. This is similar compared to the relationship to printing press and the photograph as limned by Walter Benjamin. Film, like the painting is no longer specifically controlled or limited to the wealthy or the distribution companies and altered the resulting aura and power of the medium.

Creative Commons is right now a relatively effective tool for dealing with these new changes, but it does have its limitations.  The Creative Commons model, especially that of the non-commercial license is especially problematic given the many uses of commercialism and its hybrid interdependence with non-commercial works. This is best demonstrated in the highly commercialized contemporary Art world. The non-commercial creative commons specifically forbids the intermingling between commercial and non-commercial which has prevented many from making use of this copyright. The digitalization of media has created derivatives that are outside these models of commercial and non-commercial. Given new auras and relationships of words, their understandings and meanings have become nebulous. Therefore, definitions need to be reevaluated in terms that consider the present and future of digital technologies. CC licenses exist best as a temporary fix, to an increasingly problematic issue concerning the state of digitalization within our culture.

The digitalization of media has entered new uncharted ground which needs to be addressed. Creative Commons licenses are a good quick fix to these issues, especially with regard to artists trying to make their product "free" but not to corporations which do not align with their message. But with regard to this impossible ebb and flow of digital commodities, language and laws need to be reoriented and addressed. Words like "intellectual properties", "commons", "commercial" and even the term "digital" need to be reconfigured and redefined, and we need to stop looking at this digitalized commerce as it was, before being digitalized.

Can artists refigure the world by altering the way users engage with equipment? Clearly, the functional objects we users engage with on a daily basis have social values imbedded within their design. Cutlery, for instance, presumes a certain distance and civility between a diner and her meal; handkerchiefs rest on the assumption that bodily fluids are unsightly and are best disposed of in a decorative fashion; picnic benches encourage a communal sort of outdoor gathering and privilege the family-unit. Toothpicks, coin-pouches, bucket seats, light switches, mailboxes, all have a social function. . . and the list goes on. It stands to reason that if an artist alters equipment, this also shifts the way users relate with the object, and thus the shared social values that inform its design. What would a picnic bench that affords a certain amount of control on the part of each individual-allowing each participant to isolate and convene as desired-do to the nuclear family and its dynamics, or to family law? Unfortunately, this proposition is more complicated than it seems. For to design such equipment already presumes the social values that inform conception, design, and production to be otherwise. In other words, unless the notion of the family unit as a self-organizing entity already exists, and unless social convention-and by extension the economic and political structures within which the bourgeois family is an essential element-shifts, the picnic table I described would not be designed, produced, sold, or used.

Certain works produced by Fluxus artists working in the 1960s and 1970s get around this design paradox by uncoupling and reorganizing equipmental structures. This uncoupling produces a "missing link" which, in turn, makes the equipment open-ended or, in certain cases, dysfunctional. The user must therefore imagine the larger system, which the object is a part of in order to complete the work. Employing twentieth-century philosopher Martin Heidegger's theory of equipment in Being and Time, I find that in visualizing the missing link the viewer must also consider the practice of equipment, its functional assignment, the encounters it makes possible, and the social activities it participates in.

What is equipment? Equipment consists of two major components, one of which has two faces. The form of an object and its material constitute one component, while the function to which the object is put is the second and follows closely upon the first; together these components add up to what we generally call "equipment." This relationship can be expressed in a simple equation: Form/Matter + Function = Equipment. For instance, to use Heidegger's favorite example, a hammer is made of materials (usually wood and lead) and has a form (an arm-like shape weighted at one end) that lends itself to a hammering-action. These elements are not dissociable. To change either of these will change the function, shape, or material of the hammer. To use another material (such as foam rubber), or to alter the form (to the shape of a doorknob, or instance), will most likely end unsuccessfully and will certainly change the function of the hammer as it is conventionally conceived. The opposite is true as well. To alter the function of the hammer-to use it clean the windows, for instance-will suggest alternate configurations of form and matter. A good example is George Maciunas Flux Ping-Pong (1976), which alters the function of ping-pong paddles by attaching objects to the flat surface of the paddle. One paddle, for instance, has a can attached to its surface while another boasts foam baubles; other paddles are less visibly altered, such as one that is weighted with lead. The table is itself split at the center with one side bent in a V-shape. Less about strategy and strength, and more about wit and invention, Flux Ping-Pong brings about a new relationship to the paddles and table and thus shifts the game into the register of a carnival event. Another example, Yoko Ono's Chess Set (All White Chess Set) (1966), is, as the title suggests, an all-white chess set that removes the color-coding defining oppositional teams. Since each player's pieces are identical the chess pieces and positions must be memorized; in the resulting game confusion over "us" and "them" is guaranteed. A 1997 version of the work was titled Play It By Trust, implying that this game of war might, through innovative equipmental alteration, become a process of cooperation and collaboration.

Such works, notes Maciunas, fulfill an assignment and this approach he calls "functionalism."[1] Since many Fluxus works are functional, and yet exist at one-remove from a purely equipmental context by remaining within the interpretative framework of art, they have the ability to comment upon the biases that inform function. However, as Flux Ping-Pong demonstrates, functionalist works do not merely replicate, but inventively alter, conventional tools. The Fluxus event score, Maciunas notes, is an exemplary form of functionalist art, since it  "consists in creating a concept or a method by which form can be created independently of  [the artist]."[2] Given this definition, the event score can be understood as a kind of meta-equipment; the work acts as equipment to think equipment. Yet, despite this metaphysical bias, the event score does indeed operate as equipment: it has a function, it suggests an activity, and the reader engages with it in order to realize its assignment. What characteristics distinguish a Fluxus event score from other sorts of instruction-based work? As opposed to similar forms of instruction art-such as the wall drawings by Sol LeWitt-it is rarely evident what precisely the event score is intended to realize. Usually just a few lines of text, the event score requires an interpretation. Liz Kotz describes the internal aspect of these works when she writes:

What are these texts? They can be read (have been read) under a number of rubrics: music event scores, visual art, poetic texts, performance instructions, or proposals for some kind of action or procedure. Most often, when they are read at all, these "short form" event scores are seen as tools for something else, scripts for a performance or project or musical piece which is the "real" art--even as commentators note the extent to which, for both [George] Brecht and [Yoko] Ono, this work frequently shifts away from realizable directions toward an activity that takes place mostly internally, in the act of reading or observing.[3]



An event score, like a musical score, instructs the reader who interprets it either through performance, object production, or, as Kotz suggests, through the act of reading and observation itself: any of these resulting forms might constitute the "event." In addition, Maciunas's description suggests that the event score is a self-generative machine in which the artist and reader are merely collaborators while "nature" creates the work, a conception, which seems to depart only slightly from Walter Benjamin's notion of the "author as producer."[4] The event score is "a kind of framework," writes Maciunas, "an automatic machine' within which or by which, nature (either in the form of an independent performer or indeterminate-chance compositional methods) can complete the art-form, effectively and independently of the artist-composer."[5] Given this description, the event score cannot be conceived of as an expression of the artist, nor is it linked to any particular site, form, or performance of it. It is the machine rather than the object produced.

What is the event score's form and matter? It is a text, usually typed-though at times hand-written and in one case calligraphically scripted-on a simple white card. And its function? As mentioned above, the function of the event score is to interrogate the notion of function. In one variety a function is suggested while the actual form/matter component is left open to interpretation, thus suggesting that multiple form/matter combinations are available to fulfill a specified function (and hence that one form does not necessarily follow function). For instance, in George Brecht's 1959 event score Drip Music (Second Version) only an activity is suggested.

Drip Music

Dripping.[6]

Typically, Brecht's event scores operate in this manner, dispatching instructions regarding an activity. Drip Music, for instance, gives a verb in order to indicate a function. If the event score is a type of equipment (and not merely a reference to equipment) what is produced here? Since the equipment by which the reader might "drip" is unspecified in the score, what is produced is a shift in the reader's understanding of equipment. The event score, notes Kotz, involves "reading as an activity of production'" and "a potential acting on materials"; this event score also demands that the reader interpret the meaning of this activity as music. [7]

In other instances, such as in Brecht's 1962 Saxophone Solo, this strategy is reversed and an instrument is named but not its function. The event score simply reads, "trumpet." There is no verb and thus what the reader does or imagines doing with this trumpet or saxophone will determine the nature of the solo. Here, the indeterminacy of the Fluxus event score-the confusion between the score's title and content, and well as the two instruments-clearly begs the question of interpretation. A third event score structure gives form, matter, and function, yet the expected relationship between these elements is scrambled. For instance, a 1963 event score by Ken Friedman reads:

Fruit Sonata

Play Baseball with a fruit.[8]


The text cites a number of objects-"baseball," "fruit," and "sonata"-that the reader is encouraged to imagine as part of a meaningful whole. This event score, unlike the two by Brecht cited above, gives both the form/matter (fruit shape and substance) and function (to play baseball), but the sort of game to which this score refers remains wittily elusive. In what context would one play fruit with baseball? Why?

As Friedman notes of the event score, it offers "a useful framework for many divergent ways of making art."[9] However certain commonalities bind these divergent practices. For instance, event scores borrow from music the idea of notation, the emphasis on duration, as well as the performance style (both the "solo," "ensemble," and "audience") of the classic concert hall. Furthermore, the event score bridges these musical elements with the spatial concerns of visual art. By crossing these disciplinary barriers, the event score is able to merge codes of perception that are separated and supported by art world convention (for example, the notion that visual art is hung on a gallery wall, music take place in a concert hall, etc.) in order to more directly address the nature perception while also interrogating the suppositions that support such convention. Brecht coined the term "chance-imagery," in a 1966 text of the same name, in order to link visual perception and the musical score by extending the principle of chance, popularized by the composer John Cage, to visual art. In this essay Brecht defines chance in two ways. First, chance includes the "relative" yet "unknown causes" that the artist structures into the work of art through certain mechanical procedures, such as the throw of the die. Yet, Brecht also defines chance as that which resides in the "deeper-than-conscious levels of the mind."[10] These two definitions bring the Surrealist-inspired notion of the unconscious mind together with the Duchampian and Cagean interest in quasi-scientific procedures. If Brecht's definitions are thought together, chance procedures seem to lie at the intersection of unconscious, conscious, and natural processes: the artist can transcend conscious intent but not unconscious impulses and natural phenomena. The artist wrestles with this contradiction by reframing the visual field through chance procedures in order allow random elements to enter the frame of perception.

Thus, for Brecht, chance-imagery is a conceptual method not merely for producing visual art via random means, but also for perceiving random events as visual art. "The most moving collage I ever experienced," he writes, "was the 4 x 24 foot side of a truck carrying boilers, a piece of canvas patched irregularly with other pieces of canvas of various shades of gray." If the reader follows the theory of chance-imagery to its ultimate conclusion, "the receptacle of forms available to the artist thus becomes open-ended, and eventually embraces all of nature, for the recognition of significant form becomes limited only by the observer's self." In this way, Brecht draws a spectrum from "art" to "chance-imagery." He writes, "[t]his leaves art to mean something constructed, from a starting point of preconceived notions, with the corollary that as art approaches change-imagery, the artist enters a oneness with all nature."[11]

Is chance-imagery an expansive mode of perception or simply aesthetic (disinterested) perception as art? It is, I contend, both. Although Brecht perceives the truck as an aesthetic object by relating it to collage, he also permits a perceptual passage within this aesthetic frame by allowing for the beauty of natural, unscripted phenomena. In fact, it may be argued that it is this glimpse of the random schema that Brecht finds "moving" and not the moving truck itself. Interestingly, Friedman also introduces the figure of the moving truck in order to visualize the everyday processes that are eclipsed by notions of artistic intent. In "Working from Scores," Friedman tells a story of a work by Carl Andre consisting of eleven industrial bricks. Andre approves one set of bricks while the other set lies in his assistant's warehouse. The two sets of bricks are sitting in adjacent warehouses, seemingly identical except that Andre approved one stack and not the other. Friedman writes: "One warehouse is filled with Andre's art. The other warehouse is filled with the assistant's tools." What distinguishes "Andre's art" from "the assistant's tools"? Later, Friedman imagines that "a collector buys the Andre. The movers, not knowing the difference between experimental art and anything else they might be hired to transport, walk into the wrong warehouse."[12]

Whereas for Brecht it is the moving truck that is significant, for Friedman the movers are critical in that they reveal the manual labor reified in the artwork while also highlighting the notion of authorship that certifies "the Andre," albeit in contrast. Elsewhere in this essay Friedman notes that authorship is retained in the work, yet his sardonic commentary refuses to place "the Andre" into a preordained category as either labor (a stack of bricks) or art (a signature work). The figure of the mover is introduced to signal that this epistemological question is not answered by the eye of the beholder but by the eye of the user. In other words, Friedman suggests that the significance of the bricks depends upon whom and what the movers believe this stack of bricks (or art) is for. Thus, in contrast to Brecht, Friedman does not posit intention against randomness in order to get at a larger spiritual/random totality. As in his Fruit Sonata-where the sonata form is re-purposed by placing it within the context of a game, and this game complicated by using fruit rather than a baseball-Friedman is concerned with changing the way the reader/user considers equipment by challenging and exposing the rules of the game.

As this comparison illustrates, both artists mobilize the figure of the movers/moving truck for distinct ends. For Brecht, the truck is perceived as art (and thus outside of its designated function) through a method that acknowledges the randomness of all phenomena that ultimately lie beyond the viewer's intent. Friedman, on the other hand, introduces the movers with a Marxist interest in revealing that "the Andre" is perceived as art only when labor is erased from the art commodity equation. Yet both of these Fluxus artists suggest that function cannot be understood as other than a perceptual problem, since function is not in "the Andre" nor is it in the moving truck. This interrogation of perception's relationship to function is extended from narrative to poetry by the structurally open-ended event score. For example, Brecht's Word Event (1961)-a card that reads simply "Exit"- has been interpreted as an instruction for an exit sign or, in another instance, for the performer to simply leave the stage.[13] While Word Event initiates an unfolding event with manifold, futural acts, it can also be thought of as a "ready-made" perceptual frame that directs the reader's attention to all exits as they occur. As Maciunas notes in a letter written to Tomas Schmit in 1964, this score "does not require any of us to perform it since it happens daily without any special' performance of it."[14] This is comparable to photography (both digital and analog, in different ways), which also reveals those details of the phenomenal world unavailable to the human eye. The crucial difference is that, through reductiveness and openendedness, the event score forces the reader to imagine the totality to which the detail belongs, be it instrumental, institutional, or spiritual. Even those event scores that do not directly refer to visual objects or perception encourage the reader to imagine the whole to which the strange and unlikely part belongs. At other times a part and whole are suggested together and the reader must imaginatively couple these together. Fruit belongs to what kind of baseball? In what context would one play fruit with baseball and how does this constitute a sonata? Whimsy is hereby invoked in order to refocus the viewer's perception of equipment, and the notion of perception itself, within a broader context or game.[15]

High-processing programs which are not software based, but web-ware based. No more lag for graphic intense MMORPGs. High definition streaming video. Fun.

The definition of high speed in the U.S. currently is that 760Kbits per second is standard, and 1500K (1.5M) is the new U.S. "high" speed. The definition of high speed in Europe, Australia, and other parts of the world is 8.0M - almost six times as fast as the "high" speed in the U.S. I hereafter refer to this 8.0Mbits per second speed as HSBroadband; everything else (including, ironically, the U.S. "high" speed) is dubbed low speed. Despite the American market being considered a free market, a market where the available innovative technologies can adapt to integrate within the system, adoption of HSBroadband has failed and been rejected in the United States. Without the adoption of HSBroadband internet service in the United States, we have fallen behind in our technophiliac cravings, leading us to survive in a mediocre web existence. Without HSBroadband, we are not able to stream the information at necessary speeds to validate powerful web-based software applications or high definition video.

This failure is somewhat contrary to many other historical successes starting with the industrial revolution. For over a century, the U.S. has always had the freedom, drive, and ingenuity to lead the world in integration of new technology. It has been with this freedom in the market that innovations have been permitted and accepted by the market itself. But starting with steel mills in the late 1960s, the U.S. has had several failures in adapting to new technology. Several reasons seem to exist for these failures; the free market presents a complicated picture. These failures have given engineers and market analysts a glimpse into the future of technology as it is adopted in the United States. As we are attempting to evaluate the failure of Americas adoption of HSBroadband technology, we can consider some lessons learned from agricultural technology as a parallel of broadband connectivity.

According to Raymond L. Nebel, from Virginia Tech, the dairy industry in the U.S. is "one of the most intensive technology intergraded farming systems in the world of production agriculture."1 He claims that "the market generally sorts out which technologies offer a competitive advantage." Indeed, this is the founding principle of technological adaptation. If there is no monetary incentive, nothing will happen. In the case of HSBroadband, Europe, Australia, and some of Asia must be finding such an incentive, and the U.S. is not. There is money in America for broadband, so the failure to adapt to HSBroadband must lie elsewhere. Nebel cites five reasons to decide whether a dairy farmer should integrate a new technology; by applying these same principles to HSBroadband technology, we can clearly see the breakdown of the market absorption of HSBroadband in the United States. I then supplement another ten considerations from other research.

Nebels first founding principle of adaptive technology is efficacy: does the new technology really work under conditions similar to what is on the farm? Does HSBroadband work similarly with computers as low speed? It does work if the computer has a HSBroadband interface unit; and since any computer that will be connected to any broadband must have some interface unit, the HSBroadband interface unit could be purchased as easily as the low speed broadband interface unit. But the other end of the cable connection must have an HSBroadband server, which would need to be different than the low speed unit, and the cable wire would need to be different from the low speed wire. Herein lies the biggest lack of monetary incentive. How many people in the U.S. would want to switch from low speed cable wires to high speed, and how long would it take to add new HSBroadband cable wires? At this point, the cable providers do not yet believe enough people will pay an added cost when low speed appears capable enough to appease the mass consumer.

Beyond the mass consumer, the management of an HSBroadband provider would require new training in marketing, installation, maintenance, and support, and until a complete switchover was made, both kinds of broadband support would be needed. Since Europe never set up a huge low speed broadband base, they had almost no switchover  just new sales opportunities. The European management system offered a clean base from which to build. When their broadband base becomes huge, they will have a conversion problem like the U.S. is experiencing. And at that time, the U.S. may have not converted to HSBroadband, so they could conceivably simply jump to VHSBroadband (Very High Speed, probably ten times more speed than High Speed) when it becomes marketable and beat the rest of the world in that conversion. Along the same vein as management training, Raymond Nebel discusses employee training  the cost of hiring new employees, and the cost of training them  as another principle of dairy farming technology adaptation.

Another principle, initial investment, considers what the downside risk is if the new technology does not work for you. This risk of initial investment is very real  especially in the Silicon Valley. Countless inventions have been financed into development but never gained popularity or some other need to take off well enough to repay investment costs. While the broadband providers are carefully watching the market for signs that the U.S. will be ready to dive into HSBroadband, they are carefully weighing the investment cost against the possible return on investment.

Nebels final founding principle describes the adoption of technology as a give-and-take of the cultural psychology in relation to the technology. Can individual psychological and cultural feelings and beliefs be reconciled with the technology? This final condition must be satisfied, even after all the other conditions for change have been answered satisfactorily. Obviously, until there is at least one person willing to take the risk, the change will not occur.

Although Nebels five founding principles approach with a broad stroke the failure of innovative technological adoption, we need to consider more specific failures within the system of technology. We will now approach a number of additional points on possible factors influencing the failure of U.S. adoption of HSBroadband.

New technology must match the risk factors; this was one of Nebels principles. But further than that  upgraded technology must answer the question of whether the upgrade will be beneficial enough not only to provide a monetary profit compared to investment costs, but also to be enticing enough for the established customer base to be willing to make the change. Until broadband providers can satisfactorily prove this condition satisfied, they will not make the investment. This is what the U.S. is fighting compared to the rest of the world. This was also the fight of cellular phones. The U.S. had the largest established landline telephone network in the world, and the cost of cellular was huge compared to maintaining existing land phone infrastructure. We saw a similar problem with foreign steel plants. Countries outside of the U.S. were building new, modern, efficient plants with the help of government grants, while the U.S. steel mills could not afford to build newer plants  instead, penny pinching and hanging on as long as possible using their old, established plants. Eventually, the efficiency differential between the new, foreign plants and the old, domestic plants meant U.S. plants could not compete with foreign steel plants.

A second possible factor is that some new technologies require approval from a governing agency. New drugs and medical procedures2-4, for example, must be regulated. Regulatory agencies (such as the FCC) make the approval process such that the investment costs must be overcome by such a huge profit margin as to make some technology unachievable in the U.S. Many drugs are only available by mail order outside the U.S., and may never become legal inside the U.S. Although this does not appear to be a concern currently for HSBroadband, the transmission noise phase does increase significantly, and could come under FCC regulation.

Special technologies requiring high investment in research and development is another issue for HSBroadband. For example, new semiconductor wafer fabrications cost so many billions of dollars it is literally impossible for any except the largest makers to advance to the next level of fabrication. As the knowledge and amount of research required to bring high tech ideas into reality escalates, the ability for small (traditionally more flexible) innovators to succeed rapidly diminishes. Fighting an established low speed broadband infrastructure for conversion to HSBroadband would likely need to use existing cable network and require special techniques to allow both low-speed and HSBroadband to run simultaneously on the network for some time. Some special technology solution would be required in the U.S.

Another possible factor in adopting new technology is the cost of buying permission (e.g. copyright or patent) to use the technology. For example, permission is required for the libraries6 of the future as well as purveyors of music, video and many inventions; in some cases this limits advances in technology where the patent holder does not have the means to revolutionize, but his patent is worthy of it. However, this does not appear problematic for HSBroadband.

Discovering and providing incentives for the consumers is another requirement. This does not only include changing the methods of advertising, but the means of it as well.13 Advertising is moving directly into program media instead of commercials as the ability to bypass commercials increases.7 The web is also bringing forth new and innovative methods of advertising that are rapidly undergoing necessary changes as people adapt to web-based advertising and adopt filtering techniques. Enormous creativity will be required not only for the new technologies, but also for dispersing the information to the public. Providers seem to lack sufficient motivation to take efforts in discovering and communicating, in advertising to consumers the benefits of HSBroadband.

To adopt new technologies, R&D and the technologies have to be transported to fit custom markets. This is definitely why cures for tuberculosis, Malaria and Dengue fever are not being pursued by medical research in the U.S.9 In order to adopt new technologies, the technologies have to be developed; someone with funds and knowledge has to step up to the plate. This is definitely not a factor for HSBroadband.

Another factor is choices. In many cases, so much new technology is being developed that manufacturers and buyers need to make choices about which to use. The Los Angeles police department is trying out huge amounts of innovative weapons (many non-lethal) and equipment, and must make choices about which to incorporate in their work. Choosing too many options make it hard to utilize the right equipment at the right time. LAPD is not the only instance of this phenomenon, and this may be a factor in HSBroadband.

10-11 This could actually happen to HSBroadband; if it does, I believe it will mean the U.S. becomes the first to successfully implement VHSBroadband.

After careful consideration of the failure of the U.S. to implement HSBroadband, choosing the main cause of failure is difficult, but is in reality a combination of many of these 13 factors, most of which relate to money. Although the market is considered a free market  where the introduction of new technology could be considered available to all  the freedom is deceptive. My feeling that the largest reason the U.S. is failing in regards to HSBroadband is the fight with already existing infrastructure. Like the landline telephone versus cellular market, the U.S. was the first to implement such a large infrastructure of broadband instead of dial-up or nothing at all that many people do not yet see a large enough advantage of further saved time. And, while the U.S. may consequently fail entirely at making the jump to HSBroadband, I believe it may then be the first to make the "jump to light speed" of VHSBroadband. Fun.

Short Message Services Continue to Proliferate Across the Pacific Rim
Last month, a PC World article about the growth in mobile phone subscriptions ran the header "Not Even Close". The title referred to the domination that Chinese consumers have exhibited in the Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) market. ICT refers to mobile voice, mobile messaging, and subscription services that can be delivered on these platforms. As of February 2006, there were 404 million Chinese subscribers to wireless compared to the United States distant second place of 207 million subscriptions.1  This is a staggering statistic considering that only 24.5% of the Chinese population are subscribers.2  Growth of in the use these platforms seems to be inevitable as the Chinese economy continues to rapidly grow.

Usage of mobile messaging services has mushroomed in many countries of the Pacific Rim. Over 304 billion Short Message Service (SMS) text messages were sent in 2005 by the Chinese market.3 In February 2006, Chinese subscribers sent 10 billion SMS in one week; this peak was attributed to celebrations and good wishes for the lunar New Year holiday.4 US users sent only around 81 billion SMS during the entire year of 2005.5 This tremendous Asian-Pacific usage of ICT is driving the innovations and research in mobile messaging protocols and services.

Dr. Genevieve Bell is an anthropologist and researcher at Intel studying the cultural constructs of technology. Her practice is called deep hanging out, an immersive technique placing her into the daily cultural practice of a people to study it first hand.6 Dr. Bell recently conducted a study of the use of ICTs in India, China, Singapore, Indonesia and other Pacific Rim cultures. Her lecture at UC Santa Cruz in February 2006, "The Age of the Thumb: An Ethnographic Account of Cell Phones in Asia", clarified how this technology is being utilized for culture and how it reinforces the traditions of the adopting society.

At the airport in Kuching, Malaysia, Dr. Bell observed a young woman deftly thumbing data into two mobile phones at the same time. After watching this scene for some time, Dr. Bell finally had to ask the young woman about her chore. The woman looked up with an "isnt-it-obvious" air. She held up one phone and said "Mother" and followed with the other mobile and said "boyfriend" to indicate that she was engaged in messaging from two devices.

The increasing popularity of mobile phones and text services in the Pacific Rim is characterized by the ownership of multiple devices by a user. The Penetration Rate is a statistical analysis term for the number of subscribers versus the number of people in a population.  The mobile phone penetration rate for the Republic of Korea is 80% and the Australian market is at a rate of 90%. In Singapore the rate is just over 100%; the island-states population is just shy of 4 million yet surveys show that they are employing 4.3 million mobile phones7 and Hong Kong s market has an astonishing penetration rate of 121% (8.4 million subscriptions for 6.9 million residents). 8

What explains the explosive growth of ICT in the Pacific Rim? Why have mobile phones and messaging proliferated over the PC or other communication platforms in these Pacific Rim societies? Why is it so different than the USs use of ICT? Dr. Bell argues that the reasons that ICTs have flourished in these cultures stem from multiple layers including economic, infrastructure, and most importantly: social.

Infrastructures
The mobility of the handheld platform lends flexibility in these communities where power and telecommunications infrastructures are unstable or nonexistent. Electrical power can be an unreliable resource in many of the most highly populated regions in the Pacific Rim. The swift economic restructuring has put a strain on the Chinese electrical grid. In recent years, power rationing has been enforced on public, private, and corporate entities during peak demand periods to try to ensure public safety.9 Outages were enforced over communities and industry halting manufacturing and services during the moratoriums.

Major populations and economic centers in India are at the mercy of electrical shortages as well. Outages for 9 hours are common in the communities surrounding Bombay as the nation strives to keep up with its rapid economic boom.10 Resourceful individuals continue to devise retrofits to provide power for personal computing. Unfortunately, the solutions tend to be highly elaborate and inconvenient such as powering a PC from an automotive battery and running the vehicle as a generator.

Electricity is taken for granted in the United States and many other western countries. Upstanding citizens charge their mobile devices without hesitation in public arenas such as the workplace or a cafe. (At this moment I feel the need to confess: currently, I am running a cord to my employers socket.) This would be outright theft in these communities that have regular outages. The larger mobile devices including laptops are simply too energy-thirsty in cultures with electrical rationing. The efficiency of small devices outweighs the features found in larger systems such as laptops for individuals in these economies. Kiosks built for quick charging of your phone are beginning to appear in countries where mobile phones are the ideal device. ChaliYuan is a Beijing company marketing a coin-operated public charging kiosk to fill this need. The service allows users to legally charge their devices and often feature video displays that run entertainment content (and advertising) for the user while they wait.11

Traditional Communication Networks
In many Pacific Rim countries, the communication protocols of the Internet still rely on dial-up. Landline telecommunication infrastructures have not grown any faster than the power grid in these rapidly changing areas. In India pulse dialing is still used and local toll metering and high taxes are standard. This leads to high expenses for long sessions on voice calls or using the Internet. On average mobile services are much less expensive than landline services in these areas. The disproportionate cost ratios have driven the migration to wireless; mobile phones have now outnumbered landlines in many countries including India, Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, New Zealand, and Taiwan.12

The substantial price of a personal computer should not be overlooked in this analysis. Dr. Bell has noted that it appears that very few families in this region have more than one PC.13 This is not surprising since the substantial cost of the device coupled with high costs of telecommunications and unreliable power would suggest that these types of device are not situated favorably for these areas.

Cultural Numbers
In order to do her immersive research on Chinas ICT culture, Genevieve Bell went to a vendor in Shanghai to purchase a device. Dr. Bell was stunned when the shop owner told her he had no phones to sell her; she didnt understand. She could clearly see that the shop was full of mobile phones. Bell pointedly asked the shopkeeper if she could buy a particular mobile on display in the counter. Once again, the merchant replied that he had no equipment to sell her. A myriad of thoughts passed Bells mind as she tried to process the reason this vendor simply did not want to do business with her. Dr. Bell inquired, "Is it because I am a woman?". "No", the vendor said. "A foreigner?" "No." Finally the vendor decided to explain. He relented that he had no more good numbers to sell that day.

Numbers are of significant cultural value to the Chinese; numerologies continue to play a pivotal role in many Asiatic cultures. Each number is connected to the idea of the word they homophonically resemble. Assemblies of numbers build cultural stories, wishes, and predictions. Every number string has connotations; personal association to an inauspicious number carries the daily burden of dealing with an unfortunate subtext. Dr. Bells Chinese mobile vendor would not curse her by selling her an inauspicious telephone number. Instead, she was told to return early in the day, before 8:30, or he would be sold out of (appropriate) numbers again.

This experience cannot be simply written off to a quaint custom of a minority; the practice is deeply imbued across the cultural body of China. In 2004, a Chinese businessman placed the winning auction bid of 9 million Yuan (1.1 million US) for a highly auspicious phone number.14 The number (135.8585.8585) is a homophone for the expression let me be rich be rich be rich in Chinese. A year earlier, a Chinese Airline purchased the sequence 8888 8888 to be used for its 24-hour customer service line.15 The company declined to comment on any questions about the significance and traditions of a string of eights. Eight is a highly auspicious number in traditional culture representing wealth. It is hard to believe that the implications and references to an eight-digit string of eights would be lost on the vendor or customer despite the convenience of a single repeated digit for a customer service line.

Language with a Complimentary Protocol
Inputting text messages on mobile phones can be arduous; thumb away at the "7" key four times to type the letter S. The complexities of the Asiatic ideogram would seem to translate to an even more Herculean task. In actuality it might be easier than first thought. Chinese mobile customers sent 33.8 billion text messages in the month of January 2006. This figure represents a 65.7 percent increase in the number of messages sent in January 2005.16 The character of the ideogram explains the popularity of SMS in China. Ideographic systems of writing such as Chinese are meaning-rich language platforms: any character holds a depth of concept. These protocols make it very compatible with the abbreviated nature of SMS or text-message platforms. Short is the keyword in SMS; text messages are limited to somewhere around 500 character/spaces (limits are growing). Consider that the text from this sentence until the end of the paragraph is exactly 320 characters (including spaces).

The SMS is a brief form system is friendlier to any system that can utilize brevity. The smaller gate for SMS has reinforced the abbreviated meta-languages for text compatibility. Abbreviated forms of language first appeared in chat room sessions as a labor saving technique. Now commonplace, the use of 4 instead of for and 8 for the suffix ate is a relevantly recent adaptation in public communication. Using the Chinese cultural correlation of numbers with words has proved to be a highly advantageous strategy. In Mandarin, 520 is equivalent to I love you and 748 means drop dead.17

Communities already adept in ideographic languages are predisposed to utilize this brief-form scheme to assemble contextually rich documents. The complexity of input is outweighed by the idea-rich resource nature of the language. Chinese text messages are used to communicate complex ideas such as political jokes or chapters of a story. One such SMS subscription is to the novel, Outside the Fortress Besieged. Through the service, consumers receive text message chapters of this romance novel twice a day in installments of 70 characters each.18

Old Time Religion
Genevieve Bells philosophical outlook is straightforward: Culture drives technological use. When technology reinforces sacred practices, the culture will adopt the technology even in the face of established conflicts. An example of innovative re-inscription of cultural practice through ICTs is a paid service tailored for Indonesian Muslims. Five times a day pious subscribers are reminded to practice prayers.  Intertwined into this rather mundane timer is a geo-locative service. It helps the subscribers to assure that they have properly faced toward Mecca so that the prayer is practiced appropriately as has been the orthodox for millennia.

ICTs have been co-opted all across Asian-Pacific sacred cultural milieus. The practice of ancestor worship is a deep-rooted Chinese custom reflecting the paradigm of filial piety. This duty and respect in turn earns prestige for the family. Even after the parents death, the child has the obligation to make ritual sacrifices to his parents and ancestors to honor the lineage. Sacrifices of Joss Money also known as Spirit Money are burnt or left at the graveside to help the ancestors navigate the afterlife. ICTs have started to appear in the sacrifices, or rather the joss paper version of the latest mobile technology.19 Virtuous children sacrifice the simulacra of 3G-platform devices upon ritual pyres. In this act, the phone has completely transcended from technological device to cultural artifact.

The most obvious impact of ICT is to virtually collapse geographic distances. Genevieve Bells research shows the fallacy of the neo-liberalist dogma of globalization and techno-determinism. The seductive lure of modernization is being constantly refuted by contexts of technology in the pursuit of cultural practices. Technology is used to re-inscribe a cultures meaningful rituals. Through the conceptual collapse of the geographic expanse the Diaspora has the means and virtual territory to redeploy those practices that define cultural literacy and identity (Dr. Bell would say, "profoundly local cultural practices"). 20

The wide deployment of the platform opens many avenues to be explored by new media practitioners. In the next issue of Switch Genevieve Bell answers questions about her ethnographic research of ICT and the territory it opens for artists to explore.

In the second week of April in 2006 I held a competition billed as "The Telepresent Tug of War".  This event featured two large steel cages each containing a two-ton winch.  Linking the devices across eight blocks of downtown San Jose was a bit of Python code comparing strength data about the participants.  The game worked in a similar fashion to a traditional tug-of-war.  You pull the rope, I move forward.  From this competition I found emergent pockets of team pride, a bit of show-boating and alot of enthusiasm to be a part of the game.

Below is an excerpt from my research documentation of the project.  I  discuss the cultural history of the tug of war, from its origins in China and Japan, to the more recent competitions held in Okinawa and San Francisco.  It also examines competitions of pride, especially the duel. The final segment discusses the cultural significance of sport, especially within American society, to answer questions about its influence on art.

"The Telepresent Tug of War" will be shown again at ISEA2006/Zero-One San Jose this summer at Works Gallery in San Jose.

Competition of Pride: The duel, the tug of war and John Henry
As a means of conflict resolution, the duel carries a long history throughout Europe, America, and California in particular.  The duel is separate from simple violent means of conflict resolution in that it contains a specific set of rules that participants must adhere to. .   In 1777 the Irish created an excellent example of published rules of engagement, known as the Code Duello.  This document covers the legal and honorable ways in which two men may settle their dispute.  The origin of the duel began in A.D. 501 when Gundebald, King of the Burgundians, legally established the duel as a means of legal trial. (Baldick, 12).  The belief was that to solve legal conflict, the two parties involved would  engage in a strict form of combat.  The victor was granted victory by God, which proved the validity of their argument.  The tools for this combat have been varied, but usually involved swords.  For those deemed unable to defend their honor (women, priests and men older than 60), they could hire a "champion" to represent them.  This practice or hiring a proxy became common for those of greater means, especially those of royalty.  It is arguable that the "champion" model set in place 1500 years ago is still existent in the form of hired attorneys.


The most interesting aspect of the duel model of ancient times is that the actual defendant and/or plantiff would wait for the outcome of the battle with a rope tied to his or her neck.  If their champion was defeated, they were immediately hanged as punishment.  (Baldick)  It is this idea of energy and consequence being transferred that is central to my work, the Telepresent Tug of War (TToW).  In both methods, energy is being enacted.  In the duel model, one champion defeats another with force.  This information is passed through an intermediary and enacted on a separate entity.  In the TToW, an individuel overcomes the perceived force of their opponent.  This information is sent through an electronic intermediary (TCP/IP) and enacted out in the separate location.
 "In America one only fights to kill; one fights because one sees no hope of getting ones adversary condemned to death.  There are very few duels, but they almost always end fatally." Alexis de Tocqueville, 1831 (Baldick pg.115)

Judicial Combat
Illustration from the late 15th century Chronique d Angleterre by Jean de Wavrin

 In the (American) West, especially California, the duel was a primary means of conflict resolution and entertainment.  In the 1850s, San Francisco became known as the dueling capital of the U.S.  Local papers would advertise duels as street and stage performances for local residents to attend.  It is arguable that these duels of honor were the first performance artists in California (apart from the original, displaced natives).  One duel in particular utilized a primitive form of news updates to create a comparison between the two participants.

In San Francisco, Southerner Colonel William Gwin and J.W. McCorkle decided to settle their dispute via a duel with pistols.  Colonel Gwins wife refused to attend the match in fear of watching her husband die.  To give her up to date progress of the duel, a messenger ran back and forth between the duel and her home located a few blocks away.  After each shot, she received notification that the attacker had missed his target.  Oddly enough,  both men failed to hit each other after many volleys of bullets and the duel was considered a draw.  Mrs. Gwin was saddened by the poor display of accuracy by both men. (Baldick)

This story relates to the Telepresent Tug of War in that the messenger in this story is acting in the same manner as the TCP/IP line in the artwork.  He is delivering packets of information to Mrs. Gwin, who is able to assess the situation from a distance.  In the TToW, two monitors located next to each unit stream the comparative data to observers on the contest.


San Francisco Tug-of-War, 1894
San Francisco was the scene of an altogether different display of dueling in 1894.  Billed as "the greatest international tug-of-war tournament ever held in this or any other country", the tournament hosted teams from eight different countries (U.S., Canada, Scotland, Germany, Italy, Sweden, Denmark, and Russia.)  To measure the distance pulled by a particular side, the judge was raised above the ring and slid a ball down a rail to measure the distance the rope had traveled.  This method was an excellent analog solution to the problem of force measurement (The TToW utilizes devices known as "load cells" to solve the same issue, which will be covered in the final section of this document.)  More than 10,000 people filled the pavilion to watch Canada leave with victory.  The popularity of the event led to the adoption of the tug-of-war into the Olympics in 1900.  It was finally dropped from competition in 1920.


Naha Tsunahiki, JapanUpdate.com
Although the San Francisco tug-of-war was successful in drawing alarge crowd,  it pales in comparison to the number of people who participate in the Naha tug-of-war held annually in Okinawa.  An estimated 25,000 people participate in a tug-of-war using a rope weighing 40 tons and is 100 meters long.  The contest lasts for thirty minutes and begins when team leaders stand on top of the rope and command their teams into place.  Teams are separated between East and West, which is symbolic of the two ruling dynasties of Naha from centuries ago.  "The tug-of-war dates back to 1600, when it served a duel purpose. Villagers from east and west did honorific battle for victory as a sign to shamans who predicted the future. The prayers were for a good rice harvest. The second motive was to instill peace and stability into the lives of seafarers of this island nation, and to insure their safety." (Japan Update.com)


Center of the Rope, Naha Tsunahiki
JapanUpdate.com

In other areas of Japan and China, large-scale matches are held for different reasons.  The Itoman Tsunahiki (tug-or-war) is held as a ritual to ensure proper crop growth.  Legend holds that the first Tsunahiki held in the rice paddies was successful in clearing out insects, and has therefore been performed every year since in the month of June.  In China, the sport dates back to the year 71 c.e. in which the tug-or-war was used as a means of settling a dispute over the superiority of Taoism vs. Buddhism.  Many other areas of these two countries hold Tsunahiki as ritual relating to each areas personal history.  This use of sport as ritual and cultural event will be explored in the next section.  I would first like to briefly touch upon the legend of John Henry and its reflection of cultural importance within American Society.

"With his hammer and his determination to prove his superiority over a machine, he made a name for himself in folk history.  His super strength, his grit, us endurance, and his martyrdom appeal to something fundamental in the heart of the common man.  John Henry stands for something which the pick-and-shovel Negro idolizes-brute strength.  He epitomizes the tragedy of man versus machine."  (Johnson pg.142)

The story of John Henry is a tale about a man who overcomes a machine in an industrial race.  In the process, he dies from exhaustion immediately after defeating his mechanical foe.  I want to briefly touch upon John Henry to bring to discuss the American tale of man vs. machine.  In American culture we see an abundance of reoccurring stories in which the machine is an enemy to be feared.  These stretch from the tale of John Henry, to movies such as Metropolis and The Matrix.  The story of John Henry offers a possible explanation for this fear.  During the industrialization of America, many people were displaced from their traditional job roles.  The machine had effectively destroyed the jobs of much of rural America.  This destruction was illustrated in the novels The Grapes of Wrath as well as Upton Sinclairs The Jungle.  By overcoming a machine, a cause of the Great Depression turmoil, makes John Henry the hero.

When using the Telepresent Tug of War, users are physically struggling with a machine that is loud and powerful.  With the users in different locations, all a participant can experience is this battle with a winch.  At what point does the user separate the physical experience with the mechanical and the data driven from another human participant?    The acceptance of the device as a bridge between two players relates directly to the nature of sports in general.

 Sport as Cultural Icon: Baseball, Boxing and Soccer
 "Sport, as a popular art form, is not just self-expression but is deeply and necessarily a means of interplay within an entire culture."  (McLuhan pg. 241)     Sport and art are both a reflection of society that allows the participant(s) to act out societal beliefs without endangering the social fabric.  The tragic hero, like John Henry, is found within both art and sport.  George Bellows created paintings depicting the acts of boxers in an ideological light. Examples of tragic figures in art include Jackson Pollock, Mark Rothko and Jean-Michel Basquiat.  Each of these painters rises from poverty and obscurity to become famous, only to destroyed by a tragic flaw.  Sports figures are no different.  American culture idolizes tragic athletes such as Shoeless Joe Jackson, Pete Rose, Mike Tyson, and more recently, Barry Bonds.


George Bellows  "Stag at Sharkys" 1909. The Cleveland Museum of Art
  Beyond the tragic character, art and sport also share a rich history within religion in western culture.  Art, especially through the Renaissance, was closely tied to Catholic theology in its subject matter.  Ancient Greece and Rome used sport as public performance as well as a cultural system to build class hierarchy.  It is this tie to ancient Rome, namely paganism that led early Catholics to demonize sport.  This belief still carries on today in American society in which it is a societal belief that athletes sacrifice intellect for physical prowess.  (sport pg. 91) Eastern culture holds an exact opposite view of sports. The focus on harnessing life force through body to promote spiritual growth is central to most eastern religions.

I am most interested by the embodiment of a theology into athletics and art.  When countries meet in the Olympics it becomes small battles of theology enacted through game.  Great examples include: the 1933 games in Berlin, in which the United States faced off with Hitlers "supermen", the 1973 games in which the Russians defeated the United States in Basketball, and the 1980 games in which the U.S. Hockey team defeated Russia.   In art, cultural battles have taken place in the early 1900s when the United States worked desperately to shift the cultural focus from Paris to New York, or the more recent push of Asian / Pacific Rim culture to overcome an Atlantic-based art world.   By focusing attention on a particular location, participants justify their beliefs and build a sense of national pride.  This rule applies both sport and art.

I began this section by singling out three sports: baseball, boxing and soccer.  I selected these each one represents society at a national, regional and individuel level.  Baseball is mostly considered an American sport, although which America (North or Central) I am referring to is debatable. The recent World Baseball Classic has brought this title into question.   Baseball dissects America into regional rivalries in which similar regional locations battle for ideological superiority.  The most obvious of these are: San Francisco vs. Los Angeles, Oakland vs. Anaheim, Cleveland vs. Chicago, and New York vs. Boston.

Soccer, as opposed to baseball, is played widely on a national stage.  During the first exhibition of the TToW, it was widely suggested that a Telepresent game was an excellent alternative to warfare.  This argument is debatable when we consider the World Cup "Soccer War".  In 1969, El Salvador invaded Honduras after three hotly contested matches.  Soccer has also been responsible for diplomatic strains between several African countries.  In the beginning of the Iraq war, we learned the plight of the Iraqi soccer team.  After their previous defeats, they were subject to torture by the Hussein family.

On an individuel level, boxing has played the metaphor for the common man in both English and American society. America has rallied behind boxers such as Mohammed Ali, Sonny Liston, and James Braddock (as depicted in the recent film, Cinderella Man.)  The boxer is easily compared to the "champion" of the duel as I previously discussed.  The modern day boxer is an ideological champion for the common man.  One lesser-known boxer, Tom Molineaux (a slave in 1810), was granted his freedom when his owner was in awe of his abilities.  Tom went on to represent the United States in a fight versus Great Britains Tom Cribb.  Molineaux was able to overcome racism due to his physical abilities in a sport central to American ideology.

Throughout the history of art, different movements in art have made it central to their ideals to embody the values of their specific region.  In American art, these movements included the Ash Can School, the American Landscape Painters and Regionalism, while all modernist art movements have specifically been created to promote a set a set of values.
